Introduction

Because I have translated several books from the Arabic I want to
make a clear differentiation between the earlier volumes and the
present work. The other books were spoken onto tape and the words
were in the colloquial Arabic called Maghrebi. For Bread Alone is a
manuscript, written in classical Arabic, a language I do not know.
The author had to reduce it first to Moroccan Arabic for me. Then
we used Spanish and French for ascertaining shades of meaning.
Although exact, the translation is far from literal.
It has been my experience that the illiterate, not having learned
to classify what goes into his memory, remembers everything. This
too is a technique. Total recall is like perfect pitch: it means nothing
in itself, but it can be extremely helpful to the writer who uses it
professionally. It seems almost a stroke of good luck that Choukri s
encounter with the written word should have come so late, for by
then his habits of thought were already fully formed; the educative
process did not modify them. As a writer, then, he is in an enviable
position, even though he paid a high price for it in suffering.
5

MOHAMED C H O UK R I

Choukri grew up under conditions of poverty excessive even
for Morocco. Eight of his brothers and sisters died of malnutrition
and neglect. Another brother was killed outright by Choukris
father in an access of hunger and desperation. Mohamed and one
or two others managed to survive, even under these worst possible
circumstances. For Bread Alone records his struggle for survival, up
to the time the young man made the resolve to become literate. To
have taken and implemented such a decision at the age of twenty is
unusual.
To have passed in the space of five years from learning the
letters of the alphabet to writing poems and stories is even more
unexpected.
Paul Bowles
Morocco 1973

6

Glossary

aaita: a card game
alpargatas: old-fashioned Spanish canvas slippers
baqal: a grocer or grocery
bodega: a Spanish tavern
cargador (pi. cargadores): a hand-porter
dfin\ a womans garment of sheer material, worn over the caftan
djellaba: a long, hooded garment worn by men and women
djinn (pi. djenoun)\ a spirit able to appear in human and animal
forms, and having supernatural power over human beings
fjer: the pre-dawn prayer at the mosque
hammam: a public bath
harifa: a thick soup
jefatura: the central police station
kif. a type of hashish found in North Africa
limonada: botded soda water flavoured with lemon
mahia: an eau de vie, generally made from figs or dates, distilled by
the Moroccan Jews
7

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

majoun: a paste made of hashish
maricon (pi. maricones): an effeminate man; homosexual
paseo: a walk or stroll; a drive
qahouajU a man who prepares and serves tea (or coffee) in an Arab
cafe
sala: sitting-room
sebsi: a&fpipe
(pi. surat)\ a version of the Koran
taifor: a very low, round table
tajine: a stew
hors doeuvres served with drinks in Arab and Spanish cafes
tas\ a washing basin brought to the table before a meal
tolba: Koranic students
zib\ penis
zigdoun\ a womans garment, akin to a Mother Hubbard
A Note on Pronunciation
English-speaking readers should note that the ch in North African
words is pronounced as sh in English (e.g. Choukri and Larache are
pronounced Shoukri and Larashe).

8

1
urrounded by the other boys of the neighbourhood, I stand
crying. My uncle is dead. Some of them are crying, too.
I know that this is not the same kind of crying as when I hurt
myself or when a plaything is snatched away. Later on I began
to see that many people cried. That was at the time of the great
exodus from the Rif. There had been no rain, and as a result there
was nothing to eat.
One afternoon I could not stop crying. I was hungry. I had
sucked my fingers so much that the idea of doing it again made
me sick to my stomach. My mother kept telling me: Be quiet.
Tomorrow were leaving for Tangier. Theres all the bread you want
there. You wont be crying for bread any more, once we get to
Tangier.
My little brother Abdelqader was too sick to cry as I did.
Look at your litde brother, she told me. See how he is. Why cant

S

9

MOHAMED C H O UK R I

you be like him?
I stare at his pallid face and his sunken eyes and stop crying.
But after a few moments I forget to be inspired by his silence, and
begin once more to cry.
W hen my father came in I was sobbing, and repeating the
word bread over and over. Bread. Bread. Bread. Bread. Then he
began to slap and kick me, crying: Shut up! Shut up! Shut up! If
you’re hungry, eat your mother s heart. I felt myself lifted into the
air, and he went on kicking me until his leg was tired.
We were making our way towards Tangier on foot. All along
the road there were dead donkeys and cows and horses. The dogs
and crows were pulling them apart. The entrails were soaked in
blood and pus, and worms crawled out of them. At night when
we were tired we set up our tent. Then we listened to the jackals
baying.
W hen someone died along the road, his family buried the
body there in the place where he had died. After we had set
out Abdelqader began to cough, and the cough grew worse as
we went along. Fearful for his sake and my own, I said to my
mother:
Will Abdelqader die too?
No, of course not. W ho said he was going to die ?
My uncle died.
Your brother s not going to die. He’s sick, that’s all.
I did not see as much bread in Tangier as my mother had
promised me I should. There was hunger even in Eden, but at
least it was not a hunger that killed. One day when the hunger
10

FOR BREAD ALONE

had grown too strong, I went out to Ain Ketiout to look in the
garbage dump for bones and ends of dry bread. I found another
boy there before me. He was barefoot and his clothes were in
shreds. His scalp was covered with ringworm, his arms and legs
scarred with sores.
The garbage in the middle of town is a lot better than it is
here, he said. Nazarene garbage is the best.
After that I wandered further afield in search of food,
sometimes alone, sometimes with another boy who was looking
for the same thing. One day I found a dead hen. I seized it and
hugged it close, for fear someone would snatch it away.
Mother in the city, Abdelqader propped against the cushions.
His huge eyes, half shut, watched the entrance door. He sees the
hen, and his eyes open wide. He smiles, his thin face flushes, he
moves, coughs. I find the knife. I turn towards the east, as my
mother always does when she is about to pray.
I said: Bismillah. Allahou akbar. And I kill it as I have seen
grown-ups do it.
I drew the knife back and forth across its throat until its head
fell off. I was waiting to see the blood come out.
I massage the bird a little. Maybe it will come out now.
A few drops of blackish blood appeared in its open gullet. In
the Rif I had watched them kill a sheep. They put a bowl under
its throat to catch the blood. When the bowl was full they gave
it to my mother, who was sick in bed. They held her down and
made her drink it. Her face and clothing were smeared with it.
Why doesn’t the blood come out of the hen the way it did with
11

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

the sheep?
I began to pull off the feathers.
I hear her voice. W hat are you doing? Where did you steal
that?
I found it. It was sick. But I killed it before it died.
You’re crazy. She pulled it away from me. People don’t eat
carrion.
My brother and I exchanged a glance of regret. The hen was
lost.
Each afternoon my father comes home disappointed. Not a
movement, not a word, save at his command, just as nothing can
happen unless it is decreed by Allah. He hits my mother. Several
times I have heard him tell her: I’m getting out. You can take care
of those two whelps by yourself.
He pours some snuff onto the back of his hand and sniffs it,
all the while talking to himself. Bitch. Rotten whore. He abuses
everyone with his words, sometimes even Allah.
My little brother cries as he squirms on the bed. He sobs and
calls for bread.
I see my father walking towards the bed, a wild light in his
eyes. No one can run away from the craziness in his eyes or get
out of the way of his octopus hands. He twists the small head
furiously. Blood pours out of the mouth. I run outdoors and hear
him stopping my mother s screams with kicks in the face. I hid
and waited for the end of the battle.
The voices of the night, far away and near. For the first time I
realize that I can hear better at night than by day. I looked up at
12

FOR BREAD ALONE

the sky. Allah has turned on the lights. Clouds sail across the face
of the big lamp. My mother’s ghost appears. She is calling me in
a low voice, searching for me in the darkness as she sobs. Why is
she so weak? Why isn’t she strong enough to hit him as hard as
he hits her? Men hit. Women scream and weep.
Mohamed! Come here! There’s nothing to be afraid of. Come
here.
It gave me great pleasure to see her knowing that she could
not see me. A little god.
After a while I said: Here I am.
Come here.
No. He’ll kill me. He killed Abdelqader.
Don’t be afraid. Come. He’s not going to kill you. Come on.
But be quiet, so you won’t wake the neighbours.
He was in the room taking snuffand sobbing. I was astonished.
He kills Abdelqader and then he cries about it.
They sat up all night, weeping silendy. I went to sleep and
left them sobbing together. In the morning we cried again, all
of us. It was the first time I had seen a funeral. My father walked
behind the old man who carried the litter, and I followed at the
back, lame and barefoot.
They drop him into the wet hole. I cry and shiver. There is a
mass of coagulated blood beside his mouth.
On the way back home the old man noticed the blood coming
up between my toes, and spoke to me in Riffian. W hat’s that?
He stepped on some glass, said my father. He doesn’t even
know how to walk. He’s an idiot.
13

MO HA MED C H O UK R I

Did you love your brother very much? the old man asked
me.
Yes, I said. And my mother loved him more. She loved him
more than she did me.
All people love their children, he said.
I thought of how my father had twisted Abdelqader s neck. I
wanted to cry out: He killed him! Yes. He killed him. I saw him
kill him. He did it. He killed him! I saw him. He twisted his neck
around, and the blood ran out of his mouth. I saw it. I saw him
kill him! He killed him!
To ease the unbearable hatred I felt for my father I began to
cry. Then I was afraid he was going to kill me too. He began to
scold me in a low voice loaded with menace. Stop that. You cried
enough at home.
Yes, said the old man. Stop crying. Your brother is with Allah.
W ith the angels.
I hate even the old man who buried my brother.
Every day he bought tobacco and a sack of white bread. He
goes somewhere far from Tangier to barter with the Spanish
soldiers in their barracks. Each afternoon he comes in carrying
uniforms. He sells them in the Zoco de Fuera to workmen and
poor people.
One afternoon he did not come back. I went to bed, leaving
my mother bathed in tears. We waited three days. I wept with
her, certain that I did it only to console her. I did not ask her why
she was crying. She does not love him, I know.
I find out why she is crying only when she tells me. Here we
14

FOR BREAD ALONE

are, all alone. W hos going to help us ? We don’t know anybody
in this city. Your grandmother Rouqaiya, your Aunt Fatima and
your Uncle Driss have all gone to Oran. Your father deserted
from the Spanish army. They were looking for him. They must
have found him.
We learned later that this had been the case. He had refused to
sell a blanket to a Moroccan soldier who wanted it at a very low
price, and the soldier had denounced him to the authorities.
She goes to the city in search of work. She comes back
disappointed, just as my father used to do when we first arrived
in Tangier. She sits biting her nails distractedly. She sobs.
Sorcerers make her talismans to wear around her neck; perhaps
my father will get out of prison and she will find work. She
says her prayers and lights candles at the tombs of the saints.
She looks for luck at the fortune-teller’s. There is no way out
of prison, there is no work, no luck, save by order of Allah and
Muhammad his prophet; this is what she says. I began to think:
Why doesn’t Allah give us our good luck the way he gives it to
other people?
I passed the question to my mother. That’s something we
can’t ask, she said. He knows much better than we do, and when
he wants us to know, he’ll tell us.
She sold some things we did not need, and sent me with some
other boys of the neighbourhood to pick some rosemary for her.
I was afraid the boys were going to hurt me. There was no friend
among them who would come to my aid if they should all jump
on me at once. It had often happened. I would get into a fight
15

MOHA MED C H O U K R I

with one, and they would all attack me. They helped each other.
I stayed well behind them in the middle of the road. Then
I turned and went down to the city. I like the way it moves. In
the Zoco de Fuera I filled my stomach with cabbage leaves and
orange peel.
A policeman is chasing another boy, older than I. Not much
distance between them. I imagine I am the boy. I felt myself
panting with him. People were crying: Hes going to catch him!
He’s going to catch him! Hes going to catch him! There he goes!
He’s got him!
I trembled. I felt fear, as if I had been caught myself. I would
have asked Allah not to let them catch him. But they have already
caught him. I hate the people who wanted the policeman to catch
him.
A breathless European woman arrived and stood behind the
small group of people that had been watching the capture.
It was one like that, she said.
All he left was the handle of the bag, someone was saying.
A second later I felt the blow of a nightstick on my buttocks. I
leapt into the air, crying out in Riffian: Ay mainou! Ay mainoui
I imagined myself cursing the man. There were two other
policemen now, beating the boys and pushing the men. Some of
the more poorly dressed men got blows, too. I had thought that
the police beat you and took you to jail only if you had killed or
robbed somebody, or drawn his blood in a fight.
I went to the graveyard in Bou Araqia. Large bunches of
myrtle had been left on some of the richer tombs. I gathered
16

FOR BREAD ALONE

them up and carried them to my brother’s grave. There were many
graves without tiles marking them, and without myrtle on them,
like my brothers. A mound of earth and two stones of different
shapes, one for the head and one for the feet. The sight of the
neglected graves hurt me. I thought: Even here in the cemetery
there are rich people and poor people.
I found big clumps of rosemary growing there among the
graves. There were three men passing a botde from one to the
other and drinking a dark liquid from it. One of them called to
me: Hey! Come here, boy! Agi!
I was afraid. I fled.
At lunch she said to me: That rosemary is very sweet.
We both had good appetites.
Yes, its sweet, I said.
Where did you pick it?
In the graveyard at Bou Araqia.
The graveyard!
Yes.
She stares at me open-mouthed.
I went to see Abdelqader s grave. I put a little myrtle on it.
The mound is not very high now. If it stays the way it is, all the
dirt is going to be gone, and we wont be able to tell it apart from
the others.
She stopped eating and her features froze.
I went on: There’s lots of that rosemary there growing around
the old graves.
Don’t you know you’re not supposed to eat anything that
17

MOHAMED C H O UK R I

grows in a cemetery?
Why not?
She looked at me anxiously. I go on eating with relish. She is
worried. Her appetite is gone. I thought for a moment that she
was going to vomit. She seized the plate from which I was eating
and took it away, saying in Riffian: Eat yourself up.
After a moment she asked me: Where did you get the
myrtle?
O ff some other graves. They had lots of it.
She stared. Tomorrow you’re going back to the cemetery and
take the myrtle to the same graves where you found it. Don’t you
know what graves are? And be careful nobody sees you putting
the myrtle back. We’ll buy our own myrtle for your brother. We’ll
make him a beautiful grave when we’ve saved a little money.
It was a great relief not to have my father in the house, but the
small amount of money he had left there was soon gone. I longed
to grow up quickly so I would be able to do the same sort of
work he had done. In my fantasies it was taken for granted that
he would never return. It was inadmissible that he should ever
again have a part in the life I shared with my mother.
Sometimes she takes me with her to the Zoco de Fuera. We
buy a huge pile of dry bread from the beggars. We take it home to
boil in water, sometimes with a litde oil and pepper, sometimes
without. Early one morning she said to me: I’m going to the
market to buy and sell vegetables. You stay here. Take good care
of the house. Don’t go and play with the other boys and leave the
door open for thieves to come in.
18

FOR BREAD ALONE

I began to be aware of certain differences between myself and
the other boys of the neighbourhood, even though some of them
were poorer than 1.1 had seen one of them pull chicken bones
out of a garbage pail and suck them. The garbage here is good, he
had said.
I hear them talking among themselves about me.
He’s a Riffian.
They re starving to death. They re all criminals.
He cant even speak Arabic.
The Riffians are all sick this year.
The cows and sheep they brought with them are sick too.
We don’t eat them. They’re the ones who eat them. Rotten
people eat rotten meat.
If one of their cows or sheep or goats dies, they eat it instead
of throwing it out. They eat everything.
The Djibli boy, as well as the Riffian boy, is an object of this
kind of scorn, but the scorn is not expressed in the same way or
with the same gestures. In general the Djibli is considered an
oaf. ‘The treacherous Riffian and the gullible Djibli.’ I had heard
people say it.
Next to our house there is a small orchard. The big pear tree
attracts me to it every day. Early one morning the owner of the
orchard caught me poking a long pole into the tree and shaking
the biggest and ripest pears from the branches. He drags me
along the ground and I struggle to get free. At the moment I gave
up hope, I felt the urine begin to run out of me into my wide
Arab trousers. I was crying, even though he was not hitting me.
19

MOHA MED C H O U K R I

His wife had a bright smile.
This is the flea that s been ruining our pear tree! he cried. Hes
like a rat. He spoils more than he eats.
Where's your mother, my son? The womans voice was sweet,
and it soothed my fear.
She went to sell vegetables in the market, I sobbed.
Stop crying. And your father?
He's in jail.
In jail! Poor man. Why did they put him in jail?
The question bothered me. She repeated it, caressing my
cheek. Tell me. Why is your father in jail?
I felt that a truthful reply would reflect upon the family name.
I don t know why, I said. My mother knows.
A conversation followed between the man and his wife. Then
their daughter appeared, barefoot, her head enveloped in a cloth,
and her long fingers dripping with water. They were discussing
the possibility of locking me up until my mother got back. I can
see that the two women feel sorry for me. But the man, half in
jest, half in earnest, wants me punished. He made me go into a
dark room piled with old furniture. And don't cry, you hear? he
said as he shut the door. Or I’ll take this cane to you.
It was the first time I had been shut into a room. I realized
that not only those of my own family, but other people as well,
had power over me. And then I understood that the big sweet
pears belonged to the people who had imprisoned me. Why did
we come all the way from the Rif when others stayed behind in
their own country? Why does my father go to prison, and my
20

FOR BREAD ALONE

mother go to sell vegetables, leaving me alone and with nothing
to eat, when this man stays at home with his wife ? Why can’t we
have what other people have?
Through a hole in the door I watched the girl a5 she gave the
floor a vigorous scrubbing. She was still barefoot; her flimsy skirts
were pulled up, revealing her thighs. As she bends over, I see her
small breasts shaking back and forth. They appear and disappear
inside the low-necked garment. As they tipped forward, the
breasts moved like two bunches of grapes. The white cloth
around her head, stained with henna, was like the outer leaves of
a cabbage. I rapped on the door, softly, for I was afraid. I watched
her, timing my heart to her movements. She turned towards the
door, still bent over, still scrubbing. I imagined myself calling to
her: Come and open this door! And I continued to call silendy.
Decide to come.
She dropped the rag on the floor and stood up, shaking her
hands. She put her hands on her hips and bent backwards, and a
faint grimace of pain flickered over her face. Here she is, coming
towards the door. My heart beat faster and I began to tremble. She
opened the door. W hat do you want? Her voice was friendly.
If my mother comes home and doesn’t find me there, she’s
going to hit me, I began.
She pulled her clothing down to cover her fleshy legs. For a
moment she gazed at me with compassion. I looked back at her
humbly. She buttoned up the neck of her garment and stood
erect. I see the two dark grapelike points of her breasts through
the gauzy white cloth.
21

MOHAMED C H O UK R I

Are you going to knock the pears offour tree again with your
pole?
No. You can kill me yourself if you find me doing it again.
She smiled. I did not dare to smile. She forgave me. Quickly
I ran out. Behind me I heard her voice: Come here! Are you
hungry?
I hesitated, torn between two desires. Then I said: No.
She understood the cause of my trembling, and insisted that
I wait a moment. Her parents were not in the house. I looked
at the pear tree, loving it and hating it. I was thinking that from
then on I was not going to have any more of those sweet pears.
She handed me a piece of bread that dripped with honey.
Here. If you’re hungry come back to our house. Haven’t you got
any shoes?
No. My mother told me she was going to buy me some.
She continued to look at me, smiling at me from where she
stood. Before I had run out of sight I saw her wave to me. I smiled
and waved back.
Men are harder than women, I thought. I wished that the girl
were my sister, and that the house and the orchard were ours. It
also occurred to me that the man was not as bad as my father.
He follows us wherever we go. He whispers words into her
ear, but I cannot hear what they are. She walks ahead, leaving him
behind. We cross to the opposite pavement, she holding my hand.
Sometimes she pulls me along roughly. I see him, still following
us doggedly. He is laughing. She is angry. I am unhappy.
W hat does that man want? I asked her.
22

FOR BREAD ALONE

Shut up!
I look back at him and see him smiling. He goes on following
us. W hat does this man want of my mother? Does he want to
kidnap her? A kidnapper! No, hes probably a thief. He looks
bad.
I held her hand tighdy. Why are you squeezing my hand so
hard? she demanded. I’m not going to run away from you.
Go away! I shouted at him, furious. Allah inaalik!
Hes smiling. He smiles at my mother and me, and I stare
angrily into his face. I told you to shut up, she said.
In my head I grew angry with her too. I try to take care of her
and she tells me to shut up.
She stopped to chat with a woman she knew. I saw the man
going along, farther and farther away from us. The woman patted
my head and ran her rough hand over my face. I let go of my
mother s hand so she would be free to talk, and wrapped my arms
around her legs.
Why is your Mohamed so unhappy? the woman asked my
mother.
My mother looked down at me and cupped the back of my
neck in her hand. The gesture made me feel better.
He’s always like this. He’s a strange boy.
They said goodbye to one another. Kiss Lalla el Ouizas hand,
my mother told me.
Obediendy I kissed the hard hand she held out.
I noticed that my mothers belly had begun to swell. Some
days she does not go to the market. She stays at home, and she
23

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

vomits now and then. She is pale and her legs are swollen. She
sobs. Her belly swells and swells. I began to wonder if it would
burst. I no longer noticed her sobs. Each day I am growing harder
and gloomier. Hard, hard. Sad. I have forgotten how to play.
One night, half asleep, I was carried to another house, where
I fell asleep again in the midst of three other children. In the
morning, the neighbour woman, whose husband had been killed
in an accident at work a few days earlier, came to me and said:
Your mother has a baby girl. Now you have a sister.
Once a week my mother goes to see my father in the jail.
Sometimes she comes back weeping. I began to understand
that women cry more than men. They start and stop easily, like
children. Sometimes they are upset when you think they are
going to be pleased. And they laugh when you think they are
going to be angry. And often its hard to tell whether they are sad
or happy. W hen are they going to laugh and when are they going
to cry?
I stay at home to take care of my sister Khemou. I know how
to amuse her, but not how to make her stop crying. It bothers
me finally, and I go outside. I leave her there crying, paddling
her crooked arms and legs, like a tortoise on its back. When I
go in the next time I find her asleep, or merely smiling. Usually
asleep, while the flies buzz around her face, already irritated by
mosquito bites. At night the mosquitoes and in the daytime the
flies.
My sister grows. Now my mother does not cry so much. She
has fewer complaints. I am becoming meaner, sometimes with
24

FOR BREAD ALONE

my mother and sometimes with the boys in the street. When I
feel myself overcome, either by her or by them, I break things, or
throw myself down screaming insults and hitting myself.
She began to take me and Khemou to market with her.
Khemou drinks at my mother’s breast. I usually look for my food
far from either of them. Sometimes I beg and sometimes I steal.
For the first time I dared say to her: If you don’t let me do
what I want, some day I’ll go away from this house, and never
come back.
Aha, the beetle talking! If you’re like that already, what will
you be like later?
One morning as we walked through the Zoco de Fuera, my
father bore down on us. He was on his way to find us, and he was
with a woman who was going to show him where we lived now.
My mother began to cry, there in the market. Why is she crying
about him? I wondered. He’s like a wild animal, and he’s always
in a bad temper.
That night I fell asleep as they argued and wrangled. In the
morning my mother did not go to the market. Instead she went to
the hammam. Later I found her making up her face. She looked
very happy. Then when my father went out I saw her crying again.
I did not know any woman could cry so much. I decided to ask
her what was the matter. She told me that my father had gone out
to look for the soldier who had denounced him, and now they
were going to kill each other.
I hoped he would find the soldier so that we could go on living
in the house without him. One of them would kill the other, and
25

MOHAMED C H O UK R I

that was all I wanted. I like it when he’s absent, and hate it when
he’s in the house.
In the afternoon he came back dejected, giving off a smell
of wine. I heard my mother say: You’ve been drinking, haven’t
you?
He mumbled a few words and sat down exhausted. He is sad
because he has not found his enemy, and I am sad because he has
come back.
I heard them talking about a trip to Tetuan. They were still
discussing it when I went to sleep. I woke in the night with a
full bladder. The sound of kisses, like the clapping of hands.
Hard breathing, tender murmurs. They like each other. I hate
their love. Flesh clapping. Pfou! She tells lies. I’ll never believe
her again.
No. Not like that.
W hat are they doing?
Like this.
No! No! It hurts. Like this. Like this. That’s better. No, no!
Like this. Yes, that’s right.
Breathing, kisses, groans, breathing, kisses, groans. They are
biting each other. They are devouring one another, licking each
others blood.
Mmmmm!
He’s stabbed her.
A long soft moan.
He’s killed her.
I feel my bladder emptying itself. The warm liquid running
26

FOR BREAD ALONE

between my thighs feels good.
The day before we left for Tetuan I saw the girl who had given
me the bread and honey. I told her about the trip we were going to
make. She took me home to her house with her. There I ate brown
bread with butter and honey. And she gave me a large apple, and
filled my pockets with almonds. She washed my face and hands.
Then she combed my hair forme and cut it, rubbing her fingers
over my cheek as she did so, and put eau de cologne on me. She
brought out a small mirror and told me to look into it. I obeyed,
but I looked more intently at her than at myself.
She took my head between her hands, the way I would have
taken a small bird so as not to injure it. First she rubs my cheek
tenderly and then she tickles it with her fingertips. W hen she
said goodbye she kissed me on the cheek and then on the lips.
She was a sister to whom my mother had not given birth.
The day we left for Tetuan, I remembered Abdelqader s grave.
No one would put water on it, or sprigs of myrtle, and there
were still no tiles around it. His grave will be invisible among all
the others. It will get lost, the way litde things always disappear
among the big ones.

27

2
e had found a house by an orchard in the quarter of Ain
Khabbes. My mother went back to selling vegetables in
the street. This suited my father, who liked nothing better than
to sit in the garden of the Feddane, deep in conversation with
the wounded veterans of the Spanish Civil War. I ran errands for
our Spanish neighbours. My sister rolled on the floor and tried
to learn to walk. Soon my father found me work in a nearby cafe.
My day lasted from six in the morning until after midnight. Each
month my father went and collected the thirty pesetas I had
earned with my work. He did not give me any of it. He was using
me, and I hated him for it, as I hated everyone who used others
in this way. My father uses my mother and me. The man who
runs the cafe uses me, too, since he makes me work longer than I
should. But what can I do ?
I can steal. I can steal from anybody who uses me.
29

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

I began to think of stealing as a way of regaining that which
had been taken from me. The cafe had two separate clienteles,
the daytime one and the night-time one, but on holidays they
mingled. Then those of the daytime learned what went on at
night, and those of the night-time asked for news of the daytime.
I smoked in secret. The first time I ate a piece of majoun I fainted.
Later I vomited what looked like moss. I went on being sick for
several days, and life looked strangely different during that time.
Illness makes one more alone. I understood that I was only I, face
to face with myself.
The men in the cafe encouraged me to smoke k if and eat
majoun. Daytimes it was k ifand work, but at night it was majoun
and fun. One of them said: It s only the first time you take it that
you throw up. He was right. I never felt sick again. Then when
I drank wine for the first time, and was immediately ill, they
told me the same thing about wine. The smokers and drinkers
are always right. I had no trouble the second time I tried wine.
The cafe owner saw nothing strange about a twelve-year-old boy
who got drunk and smoked k if He too drank and took hashish.
I knew that what interested him was making money.
Some nights I slept on a bench in the cafe. Other times it
was at the Spanish bakery nearby. One night I watched the
workers amuse themselves. Five or six of them took hold of
Yazidi the baker and got him to the floor. They gagged him with
a handkerchief so he could not bite them. Then one of them let
down his trousers and, squatting over Yazidi, began to rub his
buttocks, his scrotum and his sex against Yazidis nose. Since I
30

FOR BREAD ALONE

was afraid they might do the same thing to me, I decided to get
out of the bakery quickly The dangers of the streets on the way
home were preferable, even though the distance seemed great at
night when it was dark, and I was frightened.
The cafe owner lived in a house that was built against the cafe.
Sometimes he would start to get drunk there, and go on to finish
his spree at a brothel in Tetuan where he would stay until the
next day, or even two or three days if he went to a brothel in
another town. During this time his absence made it possible for
me to indulge my taste for thievery.
I got into the habit of going into his house whenever I felt like
it, and eating at table with his sons. W hen I was drunk, I slept at
the cafe, otherwise I slept in the same room with them. I saw that
the man beat his wife and children the same way as my father did.
Even so, he was less bestial. Several times I saw him kiss his sons,
and he held long, calm conversations with his wife. My father
could speak only in shouts and slaps. Sometimes I did not go
home to see my parents for more than a week. This way I escaped
from the discord and wrangling.
I grew very thin and sickly. I saw that my mother s belly was
swelling again, and I thought to myself: This time Im not going
to stay at home to take care of the baby that’s going to come out.
The belly grows, the time of screaming comes nearer. One day
there it will be. Ouaaaaah! I stopped working. During the days
while I was getting well, I spent my time catching birds in the
orchard. I made a swing out of a heavy rope and hung it from a
tree. Surprise! The swing gives me a delicious sensation. My sex
31

MOHA MED C H O U K R I

stands up all by itself when I climb onto the swing. In the orchard
there was a big tank full of water, and there I learned to swim.
Early in the morning I would go out and look for things to steal:
fruit, eggs, or hens. Whatever I found I sold to the baqal in our
quarter. Each day the sight of certain living creatures produced
great excitement in me: hens, goats, dogs and calves. Many hens
died as a result of my experiments. I would have to muzzle a dog,
or tie up a calf, but there was no need to take such precautions
with a goat or a hen, and these were more satisfactory. I began
to have pains in my chest, and mentioned them. They told me:
You’re growing up, that’s all. I have a disturbing sensation in my
nipples and in my sex, and when I squeeze the milk out of my
sex, I feel as if I were being torn to pieces inside my body.
One morning I climbed a fig tree, and through its branches
I saw Asiya, the daughter of the man who owned the orchard.
She was coming along slowly towards the tank. Bad luck, I
thought. Shes going to see me up here, and tell that father of
hers. Hes like my father; he never smiles. She looked this way
and that, stopped walking, and listened to the sounds around
her. Then she continued hesitandy, looking in every direction as
she went, taking her steps with great care. She untied the sash of
her pyjamas and pulled off the jacket like a bird getting ready to
fly. The whiteness of her skin burst forth. Again she turns and
looks around. She is not in a hurry. She seems to be listening
for something. I am overcome by anxiety. One fig falls out of
my hand, and the one in my mouth suddenly goes down my
throat. The basket leans to one side, and half the figs fall out.
32

FOR BREAD ALONE

The sun has already appeared. The circle of red on the shining
white mist of the sky was like an egg that had been broken onto
a blue plate. The animals and birds and insects have begun
their morning praise of Allah. W hen a donkey brays, its sound
drowns out the songbirds, doves and roosters. She is undressing.
Asiya, she is taking everything off. Her pyjamas slide down like
a curtain falling. Shes all undressed. Asiya, she’s naked. Asiya’s
naked. How bright she is! Full breasts, their points protruding.
Below, black hairs outline a triangle. My trousers are too tight.
They hurt in front. She takes two slow steps towards the tank.
My discomfort in front grows worse and worse. Her long hair
covers her from behind. She stoops over, and I am afraid she may
break in two. Now her hair falls forward over her shoulders and
no longer hides her back. Below the point where her white flesh
divides there is a slight darkness. My mouth tastes as though I
had been eating honey, and every part of me itches. My nipples
ache and my trousers hurt. A sweet seizure, a feeling of release,
and then delicious relaxation. I’m going to fall out of the tree. I
almost fell. She still hesitates, then she steps into the water. The
stone steps are slippery. I am afraid she may fall. I worry. She
looks at the water and all around at the orchard. She scoops up
water to her armpits and lets it run down. She lets it run over her
breasts, and splashes a little between her thighs. Then she pours
it over her head and jumps in.
I climb down from the tree and creep along the ground until
I reach the pyjamas, which I seize and quickly hide among the
bushes. Then I crawl again to the tree and climb back up, waiting
33

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

and grinning. I devour the figs greedily, delighted with my game.
She swims beautifully. The way she plunges beneath the surface
and bobs up again reminds me of a wild duck. I had heard about
the swimming prowess of mermaids, and it seemed to me that
she was like one of them. She is on her belly, her back, now on
one side, now the other. She pushes to the bottom of the pool,
and comes up dancing like an empty bottle on top of the water.
W hat a delight it is that she should not know I am here, that she
should imagine herself completely alone!
She climbs out shivering, stares in astonishment, and begins
to search wildly for her pyjamas, darting this way and that
distractedly. W hen she sights them, she puts them on and dashes
through the orchard. I am left laughing in the tree, but once again
a donkey covers all sounds with his braying.
In the night I dreamed of Asiya, still unfastening her belt,
still floating naked and darting like an eel along the bottom of
the tank. I was swimming along with her, above her, below her
and on both sides of her. We stood upright in the water for a
moment, kissed and sank.
A little girl named Mounat pulled up her dress, crouched, and
made water. She did not know I was watching. I wondered why
her pink thing had no hairs around it. It was not pretty when she
squatted down: it was as ugly as a toothless old mouth. And I saw
our neighbour Saida changing her clothes. Her belly sticks out,
not something you would want to touch. Her breasts are flabby.
So much hanging flesh disgusts me. Things became clearer. I
begin to make comparisons between beautiful things and ugly
34

FOR BREAD ALONE

ones. It seemed to me that unless women had bodies like Asiyas,
they were ugly.
I am bothered every day by my sex. I scratch it slowly with my
fingers as if it were a pimple not yet ready to burst. Then it fills
and grows hard, until it is sweating and panting. Unless I reach
pleasure during my reverie, I feel pain like two stones. I conjure
up the picture of Asiyas body. Never have I seen anything so
lovely and desirable. I kiss her, suck her breasts, and she caresses
me with her hands and her lips. I imagine her, I keep imagining
her, I maintain her picture in the dream by an effort of will, until
the liquid is forced out and I disappear into delight.
When I told Asiya that it was I who had hidden her pyjamas,
she chased me. I can jump over things that she has to go around.
I turned to look. She had almost caught up with me. I stumbled
and fell, and she fell on top of me. I tried to get up, but she had
hold of me. Again we rolled on the ground. Then she stopped the
game, looking suddenly ashamed. I thought: I too am going to
be stronger than a woman.
I use up a great many boxes of matches pursuing my newest
pastime. I sit on the edge of the tank and wait for the eels to
come out of the crevices at the bottom of the tank. I twist five
or six wax matches together, light them, and throw them at the
moving eels. Still tossing matches, I follow their frantic course
until they wriggle back into their holes. The sight of the small
flames falling in the air together with the undulating movements
of the eels, these things calm my resentment and anxiety.
I sat there now as usual, tossing bunches of matches into the
35

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

water. One bunch fell out of my hand before I was able to throw
it. I made another bunch and lighted it, without looking to see
what had become of the first, which had landed on the ground.
Next I heard the sound of canes crackling. I tried to put the fire
out by throwing rocks at it, but it only blazed higher. Then I ran
and hid in the stable. I heard voices crying for water, and burrowed
deeper into the hay, pondering my bad luck. When night came,
I crept into the stall where the cows slept. I made one of them
stand up, and I patted her head and smoothed her hide. Then I
rubbed her udder, and she let me suck on it. After three days of
fear and watchfulness in the lanes and alleys of the quarter, and
three nights of milk-sucking in the security of the stable, I fell
into the trap my father had set for me. The neighbours had to
break the bolt on our front door in order to deliver me and my
mother from the blows of his military belt. My body was covered
with bleeding welts, and one of her eyes was swollen shut. It was
many nights before I could find a comfortable position to sleep
in. I longed to be able to sleep in the air. My wounds hurt, my
bones ache, and I can feel the fever burning in my head.
I went back to get drunk and smoke k ifin the cafe. There I
saw Fatima, the cafe owner s daughter, bending over as she did
the washing, with her clothing hitched up under her sash in
front. She seemed older now, and bigger and stronger than I,
and I looked at her with longing. My father s rough treatment
of me always served only to increase the rage of my desire. The
girl turned towards me with a smile. I looked at her, and in my
mind s eye I see a gust of wind arrive, and lift her filmy garments.
36

FOR BREAD ALONE

Asiya is prettier than she is. But Fatima is in front of me. She
stood up straight and stretched. Then she put her arm behind
her back, wincing a bit. I was staring wistfully at her full bare
thighs. Quickly she let her skirts fall to cover her knees.
I imagined myself going over to her and slapping her in the
face. Then I would pull the skirt up again, and she would yank
it down angrily. I would hit her again and lift it up. She would
scream with rage, and I would set her clothes on fire. The flames
as they burned her underwear delighted me.
Suddenly she demanded: W hat is it?
Disappointed, I said: There’s no more sugar in the cafe.
She looked at me piercingly. Don’t you know where we keep
the sugar?
I glared at her.
W hat’s the matter with you today? she said, staring at me. I
did not reply, and she added: You’re strange today.
I went into the storeroom with my head bent over, and came
out with the sugar. She was still studying me with concern.
I began to invent reasons for going into the house when she
was there alone. Using the fire of my imagination I found that
I was able to undress her whenever I liked. She grew used to
my unnecessary arrivals, and I to her feigned indifference. We
hypnotized one another, each looking into the other’s eyes. At
this point we spoke very little. Our mutual understanding grew,
intensified.
One cold night I found my body warming itself beside hers,
and she said nothing. We warmed one another and slid on top
37

M OHAMED C H O U K R I

of each other, face over face, face under face. I slap her cheek to
hear the sound it makes. I bite her so her blood will run out. I
pretend to stab her, in order to hear the groan I had heard my
mother make. And for the first time I understood that girls had
something wonderful and delicious, and that, whatever it was, I
needed it.
My mother gave birth to a baby. Little sister Khemou was
growing big enough to take care of little brother Achor. One
evening at the cafe I was smoking k if and getting drunk on wine,
sitting outside the door in the fresh air. When my eyes were open
I saw the stars in the sky, and when they were shut I saw the stars
in my head. The cafe keeper noticed me sitting there, and said
with annoyance: Serve that man a glass of water.
I looked at him dreamily, and in my mind cursed him. The
son of a whore! The stars in my head went out. I said: And you?
W hat are you doing here? Give it to him yourself.
He slapped my face. Then he spat at me. I began to laugh
without control. One of the ^sm o k ers cried: Can’t you see he’s
kiffed and drunk?
That was my last night at the cafe. I went off into the dark
with the night birds whistling in my head, feeling both light and
heavy. Walking on the earth was like flying. I was not afraid of
the cane-brakes along the road, or of the horrors that might be
behind them. In order to feel even drunker I began to sing:
Ya Tetuan, ma ahlak
Tol omri ma ninsak
38

FOR BREAD ALONE

Tol hayatia ahouak.
I came across a cat, or maybe a rabbit, as I ran in the darkness
through the narrow lanes. It could have been a djinn pretending
to be a cat for all I cared.
About a week after the Aid el Kebir I went with my mother
to the stream that ran at the bottom of the orchard. She wanted
to wash the hide of the sheep we had sacrificed. Later, when we
were at home that night, she exclaimed: Allah! I left the knife
down there on the rock. The one I was scraping the sheepskin
with.
I said nothing, but ran out through the orchard to the stream.
I found the knife, and seized it as if I were going to throw it at an
adversary, at the same time glancing across to the other bank of
the stream. And I saw a djinn advancing towards the water. Like
everyone else, I knew that if you see a djinn, you must pierce the
earth with a steel blade where you stand. W ith a violent gesture,
I threw the knife downward. I tried to run, but my knees failed
me. I fell and got up again. I could neither cry out nor turn my
head. It seemed to me that if I turned and looked, I would see
the monster beside me. I kept slipping and falling and getting
up again, until I reached the house, my heart in my throat. As a
result I fell ill, got worse, and actually came near to dying. An old
man visited the house, a specialist in exorcizing evil spirits from
human bodies. The old man accomplished a miracle. He told my
mother to sacrifice a black rooster and to carry me seven times
around the well in the courtyard. In this way I began after a few
39

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

days to return to my normal self. W hen I was well again I told my
friends what had happened. All of them believed me implicidy.
Both the older and the younger ones knew all about djenoun.
In those days one thing could all too easily turn into another.
Whatever djinn might appear, or whatever mere hallucination
suggest itself to them, they understood that it came from Allah
in direct accordance with their own personal merit or lack of it.
My father now found me a new job in a brick factory, where I
earned twenty-five pesetas a week, pushing a wheel-barrow full of
clay or bricks back and forth for eight or nine hours a day. At first
my hands were covered with blisters. Later the blisters turned
into callouses. My face became hard and my body strong.
I left the brick factory and went to work at a pottery kiln. It
was the same sort of work, pushing a wheelbarrow, and the work
day was just as long, although this time it was I who collected
my wages. I gave half to my father in return for my food, lodging
and laundry. But I was tired of wheelbarrows. I’m not a donkey,
I told my mother when my father could not hear us. Anybody
who goes on all his life hauling loads up and down must be a
donkey.
And what are you going to do ?
I know what Im going to do, I said.
At lunchtime my father told me: Food costs money in this
house. Unless you work, you’ve got no food or bed here. You
understand?
I bowed my head and said: Yes. But inside I said: And you?
W hat do you do ? Isn’t it my mother who does the work?
40

FOR BREAD ALONE

I left the kiln and bought the things I needed in order to be a
bootblack. I frequented cafes and bars, stood outside doorways,
and gathered cigarette butts. I drank the dregs from the wine
glasses and ate the tapas that were left over on the little plates.
The men complained that I gave them a bad shoeshine. It was
clear that I had not mastered the craft. Usually the brush fell to
the pavement when I changed hands. And the hostility of the
other bootblacks bothered me. I became friendly with a newsboy
who was about my age. Then I stopped shining shoes and, like
him, began to hawk the daily paper ElDiario de Africa.

41

3

W

e moved to the quarter called Trancats, and I began to
help my mother sell her vegetables and fruit. My work
consisted of shouting in a strident voice at the passers-by:

jVamos a tirar la casapor la ventana!
iQuien llega tarde no come camel
;De balde! ;De balde vendo hoy!
Each afternoon I managed secredy to put aside some money with
which to buy majoun and kif. Occasionally I had enough to go to
the cinema. One day my friend Tafersiti and I decided to visit a
brothel. We drank half a botde of mahia sitting on a wall by the
barracks above the Medina.
Lalla Harouda, considered by the boys to be the best whore
from whom to learn about sex, came up to us. You’ve had a lot to
43

MOHAMED C H O U K R I •

drink, haven’t you? she said. Tafersiti looked at me. I explained
that we were only a litde happy. She examined us, an amused
expression on her face, and we both were afraid she was not
going to let us in.
Well, who’s going to go first? she said. I looked at Tafersiti.
You go in, he told me.
She wanted the money in advance. I gave it to her without
hesitation; it seemed natural that she should have asked for it.
She is selling and I am buying.
She began to take offher clothes, a cigarette hanging from her
fleshy lips. The smoke curled upward and made her squint. She
turned to me. Open your mouth, she said. She smiled and thrust
the cigarette between my lips. Then she turned her back on me,
and I unbuttoned her brassiere, my eyes on the sparse hairs in
the furrow between her buttocks. She faced me, still smiling, the
brassiere dangling from her hand, and took the cigarette from
my mouth. I smiled back at her, thinking: She used my lips as an
ashtray.
Smoke, she told me. Don’t you smoke? Nervously I pulled
out a cigarette and lit it. Take off your clothes, she said.
My trousers stood out in front. W ith agitation I unbuttoned
my fly. My heart was pounding. Still no one had a body as
beautiful as Asiya or Fatima, but with them it had been only a
superficial and slippery contact. This one will let me go into her
the way a knife goes into living flesh. I am going to stab what is
between her thighs.
She lay back on the bed like a pair of scissors and opened her
44

FOR BREAD ALONE

blades. It was shaved. I remembered Mounat as she crouched
and piddled. The legs spread wider now. She seized my sex in her
hand.
And suppose it has teeth in it, I thought. I approached her
openness with misgivings, then felt the scissors squeezing my
legs. She hugged me to her.
,
You don’t even know yet how to get into a woman.
She wet her fingers on her tongue and moved her hand down
to the other mouth. Put it in now.
I hesitated.
W hats the matter? Go on.
I thought: And if it should have teeth?
Don’t be afraid. I’m not going to eat you.
Cautiously I entered her, sinking into her slippery mouth.
Sometimes I lost it and could not find it again.
Ay, ay, ay! Not that way!
I remembered my mother telling my father: Not like that!
Like this!
So this is the first time you’ve been with a woman!
I get into her once more. I want her lips and she offers me her
cheek. I manage to get hold of her breasts. She objects, and pulls
my hand away.
Ah! Ah! Not like that! That’s my flesh you’re squeezing.
You’re too young to try that sort of thing. This is your first time.
Fatima is prettier than Lalla Harouda, who won’t even let me
touch her breasts. She let me have her lips and her breasts too.
The slippery massage by Lalla Harouda did not last very long.
45

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

Come on, she said. You’re through. She pushed me away from
her. My sex was still dripping.
Oh, not like that! she cried. Youre messing up my bed. Wait.
Let me show you.
She spread a handkerchief over her wound. I was thinking of
her buttocks. Its true, I said to myself. She’s a real professor.
There you are. You’ve slept with your first woman. Isn’t that
true? I’m the first, no?
I nodded my head.
You’ll always remember me, she told me.
I smiled at her, feeling that she liked me. My snake was still
standing. I wanted it to leave its venom inside once again.
Well, what are you waiting for? Wash and put your clothes
on. Hurry. Your friend’s waiting for his turn.
I put my trousers on. They pushed against my sex. It lay down
and then stood up again.
How was it ? said Tafersiti.
Wonderful! No teeth!
What? She hasn’t any teeth?
I’m not talking about her mouth. Her hole doesn’t bite. You’ll
see. It’s warm and soft.
You there! she shouted from the room. Come on inside.
I was thinking: It’s not good to look at it, but it feels good. It
warms your whole body, and makes you calm and clear-headed.
But it’s better to do it without looking.
Tafersiti and I would go to the brothel three or four times a week
to look for a new woman. Then we would both have her. They all
46

FOR BREAD ALONE

acted more or less the same way in bed: Come on! Hurry up! We
went back to the ones who would allow us to fondle their breasts
and kiss them, and who would let us take our time.
If they wont let you do that, I told Tafersiti, you’re only
getting half a piece.
They only let the older ones, he said. ,
And are we so young?
The women think we are, anyway.
Why don’t we go and look at the Spanish women this
afternoon?
Good. We’ll see what it’s like with them.
The first girl we met there would not take us. Uno solamente,
she insisted. Nada de dos.
Only one of us can go, I explained to Tafersiti.
Go in with her, if you want, he told me.
No. We’ll both go, or neither one of us.
She can go take a shit, he said.
She’s young and pretty.
She can still go and take a shit. In her clothes. There are plenty
of others, better than that. You’ll see.
I know.
We spoke to another woman, a litde older and calmer than
the one who had refused us. She wasn’t ugly, but the first had
been better to look at. W hat good is beauty, though, if it has
pride with it? I thought.
How does she look to you? I asked Tafersiti.
W hat’s the difference? She’ll do. The main thing is that she’ll
47

M OHAMED C H O U K R I

take us both.
Shes a little fat, I said.
It doesn’t matter. We can use her. Afterwards we’ll look for
something better.
Too much beauty is bad for you, I said.
We tossed a coin to see which one would go first. Tafersiti
drew heads. But he said: It would be better if you went first.
You’re used to it. You always go first.
I went in. jAntonio! she called. Trae aguay una toalla.
A handsome boy came to the doorway. Ya voy, he said. His
eyelashes had kohl on them, and his face was covered with pink
powder. He seemed to have breasts, and they stood out. He wore
his trousers very tight.
Give him something, the woman told me. I was confused. I
gave him two pesetas. Then I tried to give the woman her fifteen
pesetas.
No, no. Afterwards. Are you going to run away, or what ? First
we make love.
She washed my sex with soap and water. She squeezed it and
rolled it. Why is she doing that? I wondered. The Moroccan
women don’t wash it or squeeze it.
I was unable to keep it from growing hard as she worked, and
I was ashamed. She smiled, and I smiled back at her.
lEresfuerte, eh? she laughed.
She took off her brassiere and underpants. It was not shaved.
I expected her to wash herself, too, but she lay back on the bed,
one leg across the other, with her hands on her thighs. They all
48

FOR BREAD ALONE

know that the less they show, the more interesting they are, I
thought.
So she did not wash. Perhaps that was because she knew
she was clean. And now, she did not grip me with her scissors,
but merely lay there like a great tuna-fish. I had heard how the
Prophet Jonah had been swallowed by a whale. She folded one
leg under the other, and I looked between them, thinking that
this was a strange position for her to take. But obligingly she let
me kiss her lips. They tasted good.
Suddenly she cried: Ay! Ay! Wait! Weve got some hairs
caught in there. Take it out, and let me move. That wasn’t a good
way to lie. Perhaps this will be better for you.
She changed her position, and I was afraid she was not going
to let me get back in. As far as I was concerned, both positions
were good. She did not mind when I touched her breasts, or
when I sucked on her lower lip. Filling my mouth with one of
her breasts gave me a wild desire to sink my teeth into the flesh.
The hairs had caused me some pain as well. She was in no hurry
to finish.
How is she? Tafersiti asked when I came out.
Fine! Wonderful! She lets you have everything. She’s clean,
too, and smells of perfume.
She does?
You’ll see for yourself.
That night I dreamed I was sucking a womans breast. The
stream of milk that shot out of it struck me violently in the face.
One day little brother Achor died. His death left me with no
49

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

feeling of regret. I had heard him crying and seen him crawling,
but I had never thought of him as another person.
My new pleasures kept me from being submerged by life at
home. W ithout interest I watched my sister Khemou grow and
learn to talk. I was buried in my own melancholy, intent only
upon my own body and the pleasure it could give me. Each day
the world seemed to become a more complicated place. I slept in
the street more often than I slept at home.
My mother lent me some money. Tafersiti and I began to
buy fruit and vegetables from the warehouses and sell them for
our own profit in the street. W hen grapes came into season, we
bought huge quantities of them and carried them out to sell in
the country markets. This did not last very long, and we spent
all we had earned in bars and brothels. W hen winter came we
regretted our thoughdessness.
Khemou had begun to go and sit in the street with my mother
as she sold her vegetables, where she could help keep an eye on
the small boys who came to steal. One afternoon Comero, the
bully of the quarter, slapped her. I was smoking kifin a cafe when
a friend came by and told me.
Comero hit your sister. He was trying to steal a head of
cabbage. Your mother wasn’t there.
I went and found Khemou crying. Some boys I knew came by.
He’s in the Cafe Bab et Toute! Why don’t you go and beat him up ?
You can do it. I know you can. Boras butted him in the face and
knocked him out. Yes! Fight him! We’re all with you. He’ll have
nobody on his side. W ho’s as good as you with a razor-blade?
50

FOR BREAD ALONE

I bought three razor-blades and sent friends to tell Comero
I would be waiting for him outside the walls. We began in the
Souq el Berra with our fists. He was stronger than I was, but I
managed to keep out of his reach. W hen I saw that he was going
to win, I pulled out one of the razor-blades and began to slash his
face and hands and chest. My friends and I ran off, leaving him
yelling and dancing in circles.
My father s brothers had left the Rif and gone to Oran to
live, and he had been preparing to go and see them. That night,
having learned of the fight, he called in some of the neighbours
and got them to help him catch me. He had been going to make
the trip by himself, but now he went and bought another ticket,
and at one in the morning he and I boarded a bus for Nador. We
got down at Ketama for some black coffee. It was the first time
I had walked on snow. The voyage was tiring. We ate dry bread
and hard-boiled eggs, and we crossed the River Moulouya on the
shoulders of the men who always waited there to help those who
did not want to face the police on the bridge. Then we walked on
to a place in the road further ahead, and bought a ride on a truck
going past.
We passed a night in Oujda at the house of some friends of
my father s. I spent the next morning killing the lice that crawled
everywhere in my clothing.

51

4
t was night when we arrived in Oran. My father found a man
who spoke Riffian, and he showed us to the house in the New
Medina where my father s friends lived. There the houses were
built into the cliffs like caves, and dogs ran out at us, barking.
One of them tore my trousers. I was walking ahead of my father
while he picked up stones to throw at them. W hen they came
nearer, he clubbed them with the stick he was carrying. He swore
at the dogs and then he swore at me. Go on ahead, you coward,
damn you!
I stumbled and fell. He pounded me with the stick, and
I yelled. As I continued to walk ahead, he prodded me in the
back. The stones under my feet were pointed, and I was walking
through netdes. He hits me and curses me aloud, and I do the
same to him secredy. W ithout my imagination I should have
exploded.

I

53

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

A man in tattered clothing came out of one of the caves and
greeted us. We went inside. His wife was on the floor praying,
dressed in spotless white.
Presently the woman asked me for news of my mother and
my brothers and sisters who had been born in exile, in Tangier.
The only one she had seen was Abdelqader, and she was sad to
hear of his death. I did not tell her how he had died. The last time
I saw you, you were only five or six years old, she told me. And
here it is nine years later.
The following day we met my uncle and my grandmother in
Douar ej Jdid, and then we went to see my aunt in the quarter of
Serimine. She had married a man from Marrakech.
YouVe grown up, my grandmother told me. Soon you’ll be a
man. Then you’ll work and help me to live. Isn’t that right?
Yes. She was thin and sick.
My father left me behind with my aunt, and went on to look
for his brothers in other Algerian cities far from Oran. Three
months later a letter came from him saying that he had gone
back to Tetuan, and that it would be better for me to stay on in
Oran.
My aunt got her husband to find me a job, and soon I was
working on the farm of the same French woman in whose stable
he worked. I was in the vineyard from five in the morning to
six in the evening. The pause at midday for eating and resting
lasted only an hour, but often we managed to prolong it another
hour more, if nobody came by. My work consisted in guiding
two mules along the ploughed tracks in the earth.
54

FOR BREAD ALONE

I grew tanned, and the palms of my hand became calloused.
The old farm labourer under whom I worked treated me
according to the way he felt at the moment. Depending on the
circumstances he could be kind or heartless. I learned that his
harsh words were only a way of expressing the frustration he felt
at the work he was forced to do. W hat hurt me in his behaviour
was the fact that he treated me as a peasant.
The country you come from has produced only one man, and
that was Abd el Krim el Khattabi, he would tell me.
I had not yet heard of Abd el Krim, and had no idea who he
was.
I continued this backbreaking work for six months. On
Sundays I would go out to catch birds, or walk to the city. One
day I tried in vain to climb a high tree. That leg was tall and
smooth. I grew very angry at being repulsed, and so I went to the
shed and filled a can with gasoline. I doused the tree trunk and
lit a match. The flames were beautiful. I said to the charred tree:
Now you’re not so smooth. I can climb you, as high as I want.
There was no one in sight. The place was hidden from the
farmhouse and its outbuildings. The tree looked like a woman,
only it was without legs, and its branches took the place of a
head.
I looked for a smaller tree, and found it, smooth and bright.
I discovered that when I put my arms around it, they met at the
back. I cut the oudine of a woman on the trunk, with head and
torso, and then I began the creation. For a full week I was busy
cutting out two deep holes for the breasts, as well as another
55

M OHAMED C H O U K R I

even deeper one at the meeting of the legs. And so I made the
tree woman. Whenever I wanted to amuse myself I fastened an
orange into each breast-hole, and sucked on them. Sometimes I
substituted apples, so that I could chew pieces out of them. The
opening between the thighs had to be lubricated, and then I was
able to transfer all the images in my memory to the tree woman.
One evening my aunts husband told me: Tomorrow you
wont be going to the vineyard. Madame Segundi, the foremans
wife, wants to see you. She may let you work for her in the house.
That depends on whether she likes you.
I was overjoyed. But I was troubled by his final words: If she
likes you.
Madame Segundi was friendly and pleasant. She was also
young and attractive, and the litheness of her body reminded me
of Asiya. Sitting facing her I was humble, even timid. But it was
not so in my fantasies. She would be a marvellous new toy for
my dreams; it is best to change ones dreams each day. She spoke
to me in Spanish, and I tried desperately to remember the few
words I still knew.
Madame Segundi gave me three days in which to prepare
myself for work. I spent them at the circus, the cinema, and the
cafes. I carried a botde of wine with me wherever I went. At night
I would drink it at the farm in the small hut that stood alongside
my uncle s house. The only one to witness my nocturnal pleasures
was Tigre, the dog.
My pretty mistress taught me how to wash dishes and dry
them, and how to fry eggs and fish. One day I cooked her a
56

FOR BREAD ALONE

Moroccan tajiney and she was delighted with it. She got into the
habit of asking for it each week. Today we’ll have your Moroccan
food. But you’ve got to make it by yourself.
I enjoyed working for her, and I used her as a dream object
whenever I felt excited. I had begun to miss the whores of Tetuan.
Slow or fast, kissing lips and breasts, or only the cheeks, neck and
shoulders, it did not matter. But in Oran, although I had heard
about them, I had no idea how to find the brothels. Even if I had
known where they were, I could not have gone alone. I should
have needed a friend to take me. The friends I had there in Oran
were all very serious-minded. It would have been unthinkable for
me to mention my desires to anyone at the farm. How could I
have brought up the subject, when not one of them ever smiled?
Sometimes I watched Monsieur Segundi kiss his beautiful wife
and lighdy run his hands over her body. He did not mind doing
it in front of me. Usually I served them their breakfast in bed, he
bare-chested, and she in her transparent nightgown that showed
her nipples, like two raisins, underneath. Even to think of the
space between them filled my mouth with saliva and made my
senses begin to blur.
One day she asked me to wash her husband s underwear. As
I plunged the garments into the water I thought: W hat is this?
One man shouldn’t be washing another man’s underwear. Then
I said to Monique, my mistress: No. I’m not going to wash these
clothes.
Why not?
These are Monsieur Segundi’s shorts.
57

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

And so?
I hung my head and said: A man doesn’t wash another mans
underwear.
She laughed. And what about womens underwear?
I hesitated, and then told her: Womens clothes are different.
A man can wash them for her if she can’t do it herself.
You’re very funny, she said. You’re marvellous! Is that the
custom in Morocco?
I was not certain whether it was a true custom, or only one
which I had just invented. There was no precedent for it in my
experience. But I said: Yes. That’s our custom in Morocco.
It’s very strange, she said.
They laughed together about it, she and her husband. A few
days later it was Monsieur Segundi himself who ordered me to
wash his underpants. I said no. He insisted, and I continued to
refuse.
W hat do you mean, you won’t wash them? he demanded.
That’s what I mean.
Then go home and stay there!
Three days later I was sent back to work by my relatives, who
had the Segundis* approval. My mistress s parents came from Sidi
bel Abbes to visit her, and her father talked with me about his
Spanish origins. He pitied me, he said, for not being able to read
or write in any language, and he asked me if they did not teach
either Arabic or Spanish in Tetuan.
Yes, I’ve heard they teach both Arabic and Spanish, I said.
They why didn’t you go to school?
58

FOR BREAD ALONE

Because my father never thought of sending me.
Was it that he didn’t send you, or that you didn’t want to go?
I don’t know, I said. But he didn’t ever take me to any school.
He looked for a moment at my forehead. How did you get
that scar?
I was crossing the street and there was a bicycle race going on,
I told him.
I wondered later why some men were so much nicer than my
father.
The summer afternoons in Oran are fine and long. The old
men play checkers. The young ones fence with wooden swords.
The women are inside, or talking in their doorways. The children
are everywhere, playing games and fashioning toys out of clay
and pieces of wood or cane.
I went to Sidi bel Abbes with my employers. All the members
of Madame Segundi’s family were good to me, but it was her
father who seemed particularly to like me. I took a walk in the
town. It was sad and sinister, although I liked the main avenue
and the cathedral. I heard a lot of Spanish being spoken in
the streets. People passed by me on all sides, but there was no
question of speaking to any of them, nor did they speak to me. I
was among them, but far from them. I came to a street fair. The
circus spectacle began at five, and so I could not see it. I had to be
back at the Segundis’ house before that. I smoked one cigarette
after the other, and drank two glasses of wine in a Spanish bar.
Then I went to look at the circus animals in their cages. I stopped
in front of a monkey. There were some children beside its cage,
59

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

and they were teasing it. I have no idea how it happened, but
suddenly I felt the monkey s claws tearing my face. I yelled and
jumped back. The guard came and chased the children away.
Then he looked at my scratches and patted my shoulder, shouting
again at the fleeing children.
I saw something which made me forget the pain in my face
for a moment: a young couple embracing behind the circus tent,
all shining in their satin costumes. Watching their kisses awoke
all my senses. I thought how wonderful circus life must be. And
I remembered the orchard at Ain Khabbes, Asiya undressing, I
sliding on Fatimas naked body, and the whores at the brothel in
Tetuan who had opened their thighs to me.
W hen I got back to the house they painted my face with
iodine. They seemed to think the scratches were important.
Madame Segundi s aunt took care of me, and let me go for a walk
in her garden. Spiders" webs covered all the plants. Under the
dome of the summerhouse I noticed two dusty wooden benches
half eaten away by termites. The sight filled me with profound
melancholy. The garden was lugubrious. Pieces of broken objects
were scattered here and there among the plants. From time to
time in the trees above a bird sang briefly or fluttered its wings.
Lime spattered on my head and shoulders.
We drove back to Oran. The next day the scratches on my
face had turned black. When Sunday came, my employers did
not take me with them when they went for their usual ride. I
stayed behind alone in the house.
I turned on the radio for a moment. Then I shut it off and
60

FOR BREAD ALONE

began to play the phonograph. I did not understand the words
being sung on the records, but the music and the voices took me
off to a world that I saw all in bluish-green. My mistress Monique
knew I liked ‘The Blue Danube*. When she is feeling in unusually
good spirits she will say: I’m going to put on your record.
I took up the photograph album and looked through the
family pictures. There were some snapshots of Monique when
she was a little girl. I spoke to them: Grow up! Grow up right
away! As I turned the pages, she did grow up. I studied the
pictures taken at the beach, where she was coming out of the
water, or lying on the sand with her husband, or alone. There
are three colour photographs of her where she is completely
naked. In the first she is standing, leaning forward a little, with
her hands folded below her belly. In the next she is kneeling on
a fur-covered divan, bust erect, arms straight out behind her. I
imagined her asking me: Do you like this pose? And I answered:
Beautiful! Marvellous! In the third picture she is lying back on
the couch, her hands behind her head, one leg slightly turned
outward. Come on, said the picture. You’re mine, I told the silent
woman, and I wondered who could have taken such pictures of
her. Her husband, probably. If I had had a camera that morning
long ago, I could have photographed Asiya coming towards the
tank, bathing naked, searching frantically for her pyjamas, and
running away through the orchard in fright.
I went down into the food cellar to celebrate the imaginary
nuptials. First I opened the tap of a barrel and filled a carafe
with red wine whose taste I knew and liked. I put some olives
61

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

and some Danish Blue cheese on a plate. Then I ate and drank
slowly. Certain images from the time of Ain Khabbes activated
my memory. From one of the photographs the lovely Monique
was winking at me. I blew some life into it, and she stretched.
She is enjoying herself now with her husband. I got a cake of
hand soap and a glass of warm water from the bathroom. The
photograph set off the thrill of excitement that was necessary for
the delicious dream to commence. I could not have said whether
I was imagining the photograph, or whether it had invented me.
The delight in my body increases. I begin the dragons massage.
It swells and reddens, and lifts its head. It sweats and pants, and
I taste honey. Colours take over, one slipping after the other,
drowning itself in the other, each changing into another, without
colour, or the colour of all colours. I no longer knew where I
was.
I heard footsteps. Rapidly I closed my fly.
W hat are you doing here? she demanded.
Tell me. W hat are you doing down here? And with my
photograph album! W hat are you doing with that?
She seized the album and started up the stairs. I followed,
hanging my head.
W ho gave you permission to take my photograph album?
Tell me that.
She slapped me. The blow brought about the culmination of
my pleasure.
Youre drunk. You've been drinking, haven’t you? I forbid you
ever to do such a thing again.
62

FOR BREAD ALONE

I wandered in a blind rage across the fields. Tigre ran along
with me, sometimes behind, sometimes ahead of me. I suddenly
remembered that I had left the cake of soap and the glass of water
in the cellar. Monique will think: And he uses my soap, too. I felt
myself drowning in shame. Now she’ll know I make love with her
by myself.
On my return to the farm I found all the workmen with their
families, standing in a circle around a group of sheep that had
been hit by a train. Some of them had still been alive, and they
had had their throats cut according to holy law. The ones already
dead were of no use. That night the jackals howled and yapped
close to the house. They’re eating the insides now, I thought. If I
had been one of those sheep, they’d be ripping my belly now with
their fangs.
Tigre came in, blood bubbling out of him, and began to run
in a circle. Then he runs out and back in, whining the whole time.
He is trying to lick the wounds on his neck. I went to my aunts
house and woke her. She put ashes on him and bandaged him.
The bites are deep, she said. Five or six jackals must have attacked
him at once.
I tied Tigre up in my cabin for fear he would run out again,
and I watched him die, little by little. He was dead before I went
to sleep.
In the morning I put his body into a wheelbarrow and carted
it a long way out into the country, where I buried it beside an
olive tree. This was the first time I had buried a dead body. It gave
me a strange feeling. I began to ask myself: Why did this dog
63

M OHAMED C H O U K R I

have to die in such a painful way? And I thought of the sheep
that had been mangled by the train. The shepherd is stupid. Tigre
is stupid. If he had known what death was, he wouldn’t have died
like this. But the world is full of stupidity. I am stupid too.
That day when I buried Tigre, I did not want to go to the
main house and see Madame Segundi. I was still ashamed to face
her. If you know whats good for you, said my aunt, you’ll go and
see your mistress. You’re supposed to be working.
Monique herself came to see my aunt, and sat down. I began
to translate what one of them said to the other. My aunt knew
only Riffian and Arabic. She used Riffian now, and Monique
used Spanish. She was lovely and full of charm that afternoon.
Women are difficult to understand. W hen a man is sure he is
going to have trouble with a woman, it often turns out that he
is wrong. And when he thinks a woman has forgiven him, he
may be going straight towards the trouble he originally expected.
Salvation and disaster depend upon the way she happens to feel
at the moment. I sensed that Monique did not blame me for
what I had done, but neither could she let it pass unnoticed. And
so she asked me: Are you sick?
No, I’m not sick.
Then why didn’t you come to work today?
I did not answer. Then I said: The jackals killed Tigre last
night.
Your uncle told me. Poor dog! He was good and strong.
Where did you bury him?
Under an olive tree.
64

FOR BREAD ALONE

Your uncle will find another dog. She got up and took my
hand. Her goodwill made me even more ashamed. Allez! Come
to the house with me, she said.
Then she hasn’t told her husband, I thought. Perhaps she was
ashamed to.
I had often dreamed of being able to fly. Likewise I had
dreamed of being in a cave strewn with lengths of silk and rugs,
and where the walls were painted with brilliant designs. I had
only to make a gesture, and a platter would be there, bearing
whatever it was that I felt like eating. If I clapped my hands, a
marvellous girl would appear, one who had never been touched
by a man, to dance naked in a fog of incense smoke before me.
One morning after her husband had gone out, I saw Monique
go into the bathroom with a packet of cotton and a pair of her
underpants. In the garbage pail I had often seen wads of cotton
soaked with dark blood. I wondered where the blood came
from.
I walked carefully over to the door and peeked through the
keyhole. She takes off the underwear she has on and sits down
on the bidet. She makes water. Then she washes between her legs.
She pats a small towel into her wound, like the first woman I
ever slept with in the brothel in Tetuan. She seizes a handful of
absorbent cotton, pulls out the towel and examines it, and throws
it into the bathtub. Then she puts the cotton into the wound
and pulls on the clean underpants. I wondered if all women bled
like this one, like pretty Monique. If they bleed all the time, it’s
disgusting.
65

M OHAM ED C H O U K R I

There was a boy who lived nearby, a little younger than I.
One day we took a walk into the country. I told him we were
going to catch birds in the traps we carried with us. The boy was
handsome, and delicate as a girl. He wore shorts that came above
his knees. We ate meat and hard-boiled eggs under the olive
trees. Then I persuaded him to smoke a cigarette and drink a
little wine. He coughed when he tried to inhale the smoke, and
after he had drunk from the bottle he shuddered. This is the first
time IVe smoked or drunk wine, he said, and I told him what
they had told me in Tetuan: You w ont cough or make faces the
next time. That happens only the first time. It was the same way
with me.
Do you feel sick? I asked him.
Just a little.
We walked into a field of wheat. To be drunk is relaxing. His
cheeks are pink, his lips bright red. We sat down in the middle of
the wheat, and I lay back. He did likewise. I thought of Tetuan,
of a song that began: I loved a girl in Andalucia. She was young,
she was tiny, she was tanned.
The wine ran through me, and I found myself trembling. My
hand stroked his. He pulled away and sat up, looking at me with
an expression of fear. W hat do you want? he demanded.
Nothing. W hats the matter? Lie down. I was joking.
I don’t like that sort of joke.
W ith my eyes I said: I do, with you.
He made as if to rise. I seized his hand. I was still trembling.
He wrenched his hand away and got to his feet. Before he could
66

FOR BREAD ALONE

take his first step, I wrapped my arms around his legs, so that he
fell. I fell partially on top of him.
Im going to tell my mother! hexried. And my father too!
First he bites my hand, and then he bites the earth.
That night my aunt scolded me. I was mortified, and denied
everything. I swore I had done nothing %o him. Later I saw her
kissing the boys mother on the top of her head, begging her
pardon. I was ashamed.
Your mother must have suffered when you lived in Tetuan,
she told me. If you go on like this, your whole family will suffer,
and so will you. Behave yourself.
I imagined saying to her: W hat should I do to behave myself,
Aunt? How?
And I imagined her answering: Don’t do things you know are
wrong.
Then I would have said: But I have to. I like everything thats
wrong. Those are the best things.
I don’t understand you.
I don’t understand myself.
Madame Segundi began to notice my preoccupied expression
and the slowing down in the tempo of my work. You miss your
family in Tetuan, she said.
I don’t know.
Listen. We’re going to give you a whole month’s vacation. A
month is enough for you to go and visit your family, and get back
here.
I agreed to go to Tetuan and return. I saw my grandmother
67

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

and my uncle very seldom. Sometimes when they came to the
farm to visit my aunt, I was not there. I felt no particular fondness
for them, neither affection nor dislike.
The only time Oran looked pleasant to me was the day I left.
There is a saying that goes:
E d dakhel en Oueheran zerbanne,
Ou el harej menha harbanne.
On the way back to Tetuan I tried to decide which was better.
Oran is exile and Tetuan is imprisonment. And since I am happier
in Tetuan than in Oran, that means I prefer jail in my native land
to freedom in exile.
I spent two days in Melilla and one in Nador. I talked about
Oran with people I did not know. One of them said: W ith
everybody trying to get to Oran, here you are coming away from
it!

68

5

O

\

nce I found myself back in Tetuan, I was sure that I should
not be returning to Oran. My mother had given birth to
another girl, but the baby had died almost at birth. Now her
belly was very full again. My father was still happily unemployed.
He spent the greater part of his day in the Feddane talking to
madmen and friends who had been wounded in the Spanish
Civil War. My sister Khemou went on growing, and my mother
already relied upon her help at the vegetable stand. Some friends
arranged a reconciliation between Comero and me. He now had
a scar that ran right along his cheek. At the brothel I found that
some of the girls were gone and new ones had taken their place.
Because I enjoyed it, I formed the habit of sleeping in the alleys
along with the other vagabonds. One morning as I lay asleep in
the street a girl woke me up and asked me if I were not the son of
Sida Maimouna. I said I was.
69

M OHAM ED C H O U K R I

W hy don’t you sleep at home, then?
My father threw me out.
The girl was lame. She went and got me a piece of buttered
bread and a glass of coffee. I should have been ashamed to refuse
her generosity. However, I resolved to get up earlier in the future.
I was beginning to distrust people who showed goodwill towards
me, whether they were men or women.
I returned to the bakery where I had so often slept in the past,
where I would roll myself up like a hedgehog, my back pushed
against the warm oven. Whenever I move in the night, or get
up to go out and relieve myself, I find several cats asleep on top
of me. Often I enjoyed the sound of their purring. It reminded
me of a motor going in a distant factory. I loved muted sounds,
whether they came from far or near. The songs from the cafts,
heard from far away, were beautifully sad.
Another morning it was a man who woke me up. Aren’t you
the son of Si Haddou?
No, I’m not.
He insisted. Aren’t you his son Mohamed?
No. I’m not his son.
Then what is your name ?
Mohamed.
But your father is Si Haddou Allal Choukri. And your mother
is Sida Maimouna.
I told you no.
W ho is your father, then?
He’s dead. He died a long time ago.
70

FOR BREAD ALONE

And what was his name ?
I don’t know.
You don’t know the name of your own father?
I did know it, but I’ve forgotten. I was still in my mother’s
belly when he died.
He looked at me a moment, and themsaid: It looks to me as if
there’s something the matter with your brain.
He held out two pesetas. Here. You must be hungry. Go and
buy yourself some breakfast.
I don’t need anything, I said curdy. I have money.
He seemed mystified. I don’t understand. You have money,
and you sleep here in the corner like a cat. You’re a litde crazy.
I was angry. The cat is you, and you’re completely crazy!
Suddenly I howled into his face, like a wolf. Aaaaooou! Then
I walked away, leaving him standing there, saying: Bismillah
rahman er rahim! Preserve me from the young ones of today!
My mother now gave birth to another girl, whom she named
Zohra, after the one who had just died. A rat bit her on the hand
one night, and she died, too.
My father had a habit of stealing up behind me in the street
and seizing my shirt collar. Then with one hand he would twist
my arm behind my back, while with the other he would beat
me until the blood ran. W hen that happened, I knew the thick
military belt was waiting at home for me. And when his arms
and legs were tired from beating and kicking, he would bite my
shoulders and arms, pinch my ears, and buffet my face with his
fists. If he catches me in the street, someone usually intervenes
71

M OHAM ED C H O U K R I

and sets me free. But he has learned not to do it in the street. So
now, when he grabs me I fall to the pavement and yell as loud as I
can. He will sweep the pavement with me for a moment, kicking
me all the while, until I manage .to get out of his grip and go far
enough away from him to be able to curse him.
One morning I sat in a cafe smoking ^i/with two pickpockets.
We decided to work together that day in order to spend a night
of debauchery at the brothel. We went to the Plaza Nueva where
the crowd was densest. It was not long before I felt the furious
grip of my father s hand on the back of my neck. Before I had
time to throw myself down, my two companions had gone at
him with their fists and heads. I heard him shouting for help
between groans. As I looked back at him, I saw that he had both
hands over his face, and blood was trickling rapidly between his
fingers.
W hat was the matter with that son of a bitch? Abdeslam
demanded.
Nothing, I said. That was my father.
Your father!
Sebtaoui came up then, exclaiming:
Son of garbage! Son of a whore! W hat did he want with
you?
It was his father.
His father! He turned to me.
Yes, my father. But you should have hit him harder. He s a
W hen we got to the end of the alley at El Talaa, I saw a drunk
72

FOR BREAD ALONE

coming out of a house. It was a cold rainy night.
The rain will cut down the cold, said Abdeslam.
The drunk staggered past us. We heard a thud. He s very
drunk, Sebtaoui said. Then we saw the man struggling to get up.
We went on to the same doorway he had come out of. A woman
appeared, her breath stinking of alcohol, ^nd showed us into the
house. She took Abdeslam s head between her hands and kissed
him on the lips, slowly and noisily.
W hat did you bring me today? she began. W hat have you
brought for your mother?
Anything, he told her. Whatever you want.
Sebtaoui walked into a brighdy lit room from which came
the sound of talking and laughter.
Abdeslam introduced me to the drunken woman. Mama, he
said, this is a new friend.
She looked at me between half-shut lids.
He’s going to stay up with us tonight, he went on.
She took my head between her hands gently, and kissed my
lips, making a smacking sound. You’re welcome in our house,
she said, still touching my face, tilting her head back slightly and
looking squarely into my eyes. W hat does this woman want of
me? I wondered. Is she trying to put a spell on me, perhaps?
Abdeslam watched his mother, smiling. But is she really his
mother? Or is he having fun with me? Perhaps she only brought
him up.
Everybody go upstairs, she said.
Sebtaoui and I climbed the stairs to the floor above, leaving
73

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

Abdeslam talking to his mother. A small girl came in carrying a
tray. She placed a botde of cognac on it, and went out. Nothing
better than cognac on a cold night like this, said Sebtaoui.
That’s right, I said.
We had had a delicious dinner. The purse we had finally
succeeded in stealing (thanks to a system whereby Sebtaoui
opened the foreign womans handbag, Abdeslam reached in and
removed the purse, and I was left with it) proved to have in it
more than three thousand pesetas.
W hat’s happened to Abdeslam? I said finally.
He’s getting his mother to send out for three girls. A lot of
them don’t whore publicly. They stay home and wait for the
madame to get in touch with them. Some of them are married.
Once in a while you’ll even find a virgin.
How can you sleep with a girl who’s still a virgin?
You can’t. She just comes along with the other girls. When it’s
time to sleep, the madame either sends somebody along with the
girl to see that she gets home, or lets her spend the night with her.
And suppose somebody wants a virgin? I said.
In that case, he pays what it costs.
How much, for instance?
He looked at me. Is that what you want? Do you want to
break in a virgin?
No, I was just wondering.
You’d have to pay at least a thousand or fifteen hundred
pesetas.
Doesn’t Abdeslam’s mother have any girls here in the house? I
74

FOR BREAD ALONE

asked him. I thought I heard some girls talking in that room you
went into.
She’s got two professionals here, yes, he said. They’re very
pretty, too. But Abdeslam and I are fed up with them. There are
other good ones who come once in a while. Tonight there’s only
one outside girl down there, and she’s drinking cognac as fast as
she can, to kill the pain in her tooth.
We heard the voices and laughter of girls from below. Here
they are, said Sebtaoui. They’re coming up.
Abdeslam’s mother appeared, wreathed in smiles, and behind
her came three girls wearing caftans. It’s a real wedding, I thought
to myself.
The woman poured herself a glass of cognac and went out.
Abdeslam brought in a carton of Virginia cigarettes. W ith no
hesitating the girls sat down, one beside each of us. That was the
first night.
For three days I did not go out into the street. Each morning
the girls walked to the hammam to bathe. They would come
back in the afternoon, clean, perfumed and painted. Sebtaoui
and Abdeslam go out together. I prefer to stay in, asleep, or
daydreaming, recalling scenes from Tangier, Tetuan or Oran. At
night, life took on the flavour of eternity. In the three days I spent
only three hundred pesetas. Sometimes Sida Aziza, Abdeslam’s
mother, comes in to see me, to talk and drink and chainsmoke
Virginia cigarettes, or even kif.
The fourth evening neither Abdeslam nor Sebtaoui came
back, and Sida Aziza sent me out to look for them. Two hours
75

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

later I returned, having failed to find them, and Sida Aziza
sobbed when she saw me. They’ve been arrested, she declared.
I had no idea of how to calm her. Now and then I murmured: I
hope they haven’t caught them.
I thought of the things that could happen to my two
companions. Sida Aziza came and went, back and forth, always
carrying a full glass in her hand, until one in the morning.
Sometimes she was sobbing, and sometimes laughing.
There’s a girl downstairs who’s going to sleep by herself. Do
you want to sleep with her? Don’t give her anything. I’ll fix it up
with her later.
I smiled. She drained her glass at one gulp, and said: You
remind me of my brother Salam who died when he was about
your age. He got hit by a car.
She refilled her glass, walked out of the room, and began to
call: Yasmina! Come up!
I heard the two of them whispering outside the door, and
I thought: She’s arranging it for me. The girl came in, smiling
modestly. She wore a caftan and her perfume was strong.
It’s still very cold out, in spite of all the rain that’s fallen, she
said. I mixed her cognac with limonada. We did not say very
much. Her presence was an antidote to my boredom. I took her
hand in mine, and said with my eyes and my smile:
There are a lot of things I don’t understand. And you,
Yasmina?
The same with me. There are many things I don’t understand
either, her eyes seemed to say.
76

t was the neighbours who forced a truce between my father
and me. I went back to helping my mother run her vegetable
stand. But I was forbidden to go out at night, which was
unbearable. Nights were all I had, since I spent the entire day in
the street with my mother.
One morning two secret policemen stood beside the
vegetable stand: a Moroccan and a Spaniard. Come with us, said
the Moroccan. I thought then of Abdeslam and Sebtaoui. Across
from our stall Lalla Kinza sold mint. Her son was there. I asked
him to mind the stall for me until I got back, or until my mother
returned from the market.
They took me to the jefatura. Where are Abdeslam and
Sebtaoui? the Moroccan asked me.
I don’t know them.
W hat do you mean, you don’t know them?

I

77

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

That’s right.
He slapped me twice and seized the front of my clothing
with one hand, twisting it around. Listen! If you don’t tell us the
truth, we’re going to put your face on the back of your head. You
understand?
A Spanish policeman put his head out of an office and said:
Take him to Senor Alvarez.
He was looking down when I went in. Then he slowly raised
his head. Aha! So it’s you!
I remembered A'in Khabbes. In the old days I gave his son
Julio all the birds that had died in my traps, because they were
not edible. And his wife used to send me to the baqal or take me
to market with her to help carry the food back to her house.
Where does your family live now? he asked me.
In Trancats.
Does your mother still sell vegetables ?
Yes.
And you. W hat do you do ?
I help her at the stand.
But you also go out with certain pickpockets.
No! I don’t know any thieves.
Don’t you know Abdeslam and Sebtaoui ?
Sometimes I see them at the Cafe Trancats, but I don’t go out
with them.
Have you any idea where they might be ?
I don’t know.
How long is it since you saw them?
78

FOR BREAD ALONE

More than a week.
He looked down briefly at the papers on his desk. Ayayay! he
exclaimed. After a moment, he said: All right. You can go. But be
careful you don’t get caught with thieves some day.
I thanked him and went out. In the street I began to spit out
the flecks of blood that I had been swallowing while I was in the
presence of Senor Alba. (That was the name we used to give him
in the old days.) I was thinking: If there’s anybody in the world I
wish would die before his hour comes, it’s my father. And if there
were others, they would surely look like him. How many times
have I killed him in my mind? All that’s needed is for me really
to kill him.
I refused to eat the meal, although it tempted me. I did not
want to be late to the cinema. I had decided to eat chicken and
peas in my imagination that evening. My hand always shakes
when I cut a piece of meat in front of him. He glares at me, so
that I eat distractedly, like a nervous cat. His essence stays with
us even when he is not there himself. None of us had the right to
touch anything. His will was necessarily our choice. Sometimes I
ask for my share of the food earlier, so that I can eat it by myself.
But my mother tells me: No. You shouldn’t eat alone. It’s a bad
habit.
My father is closer to Allah than we are, and nearer to the
prophets and saints. Many times I have imagined being able to
eat in peace, and all I wanted. His presence makes me doubt the
reality of whatever food is offered me. My mother tells me: Your
father’s not going to eat with us today. Sit down at the taifor with
79

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

us and eat.
I don’t want anything.
He is not at home but he is here because I’m afraid of him.
Mohamed! Sit down with us and eat, I tell you!
No! I shout. I’m not going to eat.
Why not?
I’ve already eaten chicken with onions, raisins and almonds.
Where ? she demanded.
I tapped my forehead. Here, I told her.
Are you crazy, or what?
I told you, I’m full. You understand?
Don’t let him come in later and find you eating by yourself.
Thus she holds him over my head when she wants her own
way. My glance upwards at her was dictated by my fear. I began to
eat without appetite. My love for her is bound up with my hatred
for him. I ceased to eat. He came in. Now the fear is really with
me. An instant ago I was imagining his existence. But now here
he is, as real as the dish of repulsive tripe on the taifor.
Why aren’t you eating?
I’m full, I told him.
It’s a lie. You’re not full. Not to my way of thinking.
I swear I can’t eat any more.
You’re lying. I know you. You’re the son of this whore here.
I’ve been a whore only with you, she told him. People would
know about it if I’d been a whore.
He hit her in the face.
You always humiliate me like this, she cried defiantly.
80

FOR BREAD ALONE

He hit her a second time, and bellowed at her and at Khemou:
Stop eating, you two! Then he turned back to me. You’re going
to eat it all by yourself. Just you. He’s going to eat it all, and with
no help. By himself! You’re going to eat it, I tell you. Did you
hear me or not?
So that he will not hit me, I say: Yes.
Well, get busy. W hat are you waiting for?
No! No! cried my mother. You’re going to kill him!
Shut up! W hat a whore she is! Let him die. After he’s gone,
you can follow him.
She knelt, raising her face to his. He faces her, like a giant
looking down at a midget. The flock is his. He can begin with
whichever one he wants. Her resistance has dissolved into sobs.
Khemou is all bent over, and I can see her trembling.
By himself! Come on! Start! I’ll show you how to eat. From
now on you’re not going to refuse anything that’s offered you.
Do you hear?
I looked back at him with tempered revolt on my face.
Don’t look at me that way! He slapped me with all his
strength. I hung my head. W ith the tip of my tongue I felt along
the inside of my lower lip. There was a painful cut.
You won’t even refuse carrion if it’s given you!
My mouth is slowly filling with liquid, warm, salty, sweet,
delicious. I can feel my stomach swelling. W ith all my willpower
I forced myself to believe that this was a bet, and that I had to
win it.
Chewing was a bloody, salty operation. Each mouthful
81

M OHAM ED C H O U K R I

deepens the hatred. Why am I always with this man, simply
because he happens to be my father? If I were stronger than he,
he would be sitting here in my place eating. I'd be just as hard and
crazy as he is.
I awoke in the Hospital Nacional, breathing slowly. They had
pumped my stomach. I could still feel the cramps.
His voice reminds me of the needle going into the flesh when
the injection is badly given.
Her voice: Asleep.
He’s got to eat with us.
He's tired. He's been working very hard with me at the stall.
She puts him off. Which is why I do not hate her as I do him,
or wish for her death as I do for his. W hen he comes into the
house, only he has the right to exist.
Sometimes I make mistakes. I heard him talking, thought there
was someone with him, went upstairs, and was surprised. I could
not go back. I found him sitting alone, an ominous expression
on his face. He frowned when he saw me. He had been cursing us
who were not present, and thus we were all there around him. He
drags back those who are not here, and pronounces judgement
on them. Whatever he pleases. Like Allah.
Where’s your mother?
Buying vegetables. At the wholesale market.
W ho’s at the stall?
Khemou.
And you?
Mother didn’t want me to go with her.
82

FOR BREAD ALONE

And now you’ve come here to eat?
No.
Come on. You thought I’d gone to the Feddane. I know a little
about you, when you come in and go out, you son of a bitch. Tell
me. Isn’t that true? Speak up. I don’t feel like your father. W ho
knows? Maybe somebody else was with your mother. You’re
nothing like me. More like her. She spoils you the whole time.
You plot together against me. You defend each other. You never
listen to what I tell you. Isn’t it true, what I’m saying? Speak up,
you damned whelp! You hate me so much you wish I were dead.
I thought to myself: Now you’re beginning to make sense.
You want her all to yourself. She’s the only thing in the world
you care about.
That’s true, I thought. You don’t think I’m going to love a dog
like you!
I can see the love in her eyes, and in yours too. Anybody’d
think you were still sucking her milk.
And you? I thought. I wonder how your mother was with
you.
You’ve still got her milk in you. But I’m the one who married
her. She’s your mother, yes. But I’m your father. If there’s anybody
you should listen to, it’s me. Nobody else, just me! Me alone! You
obey me, not her, do you hear?
I hear you perfecdy, O Khalifa of Allah on earth, I said
without speaking.
But it’s no good talking to you, he went on. Words don’t mean
anything. Even when I’m in front of you, you don’t believe I’m
83

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

here. I want every one of my children to think of me as always
in front of him, whether Im here or not. Do you hear me, damn
you?
I hear, O messenger of Allah!
The only thing you’re good for is to bite your mothers
nipples.
I remained present in front of him as he wanted me to.
Tell me. Just why did you come here now ?
Mother told me to come home.
Why?
To clean the room.
You’re all alike, you liars. She doesn’t dare to leave you at the
stall because you steal the money. She doesn’t take you with her
to the market because you eat everything in sight. The vegetable
men and the porters down there have told me all about you.
They’ve caught you in the act. Filling your pockets with fruit and
nuts, and insulting them if they say anything. If only I could find
a way to get rid of you once and for all, damn you!
That’s just how I feel, too, I said silently to the maniac.
I wish I knew why I hate you so much, he went on. Now go
out to the stall. Don’t let the kids steal from Khemou.
I was trembling as I went back down the stairs. I don’t want to
be late to the cinema.
He’s tired. He’s been working very hard with me at the stall.
She puts him off. Which is why I do not hate her as I do him.
I tiptoe carefully up to the roof. He is quiet now because he
is filling his mouth. He eats like an animal. I tie the rope with
84

FOR BREAD ALONE

which I am going to escape, and look behind me. His ghost is
standing there.
Where are you going, damn you? Stay where you are.
W ithout hesitation I leapt out and caught hold of the thick
electric cables that were strung along the street. I heard him
yelling. His hands reach out into the emptiness to strangle me. I
thought to myself: I knew all along this was going to happen. My
intuition didn’t play me false.
You wait, you son of a whore!
Then he was not there. I looked down. It made me a little
dizzy.
He’ll go out of the house and try to catch me as I fall, I
thought. Then he’ll grind me to a pulp. He’s very bad tonight.
I breathed deeply, shut my eyes, and let myself drop, landing
on top of a pile of stones and rubbish. As I ran my foot hit
something alive and round.
My head! W ho’s that? Grab him! Stop thief! Help!
Everything rolls and slides under my bare feet. I can tell the
difference between melons or watermelons and human heads
only when I hear someone cry out under my feet.
The night-watchman came towards me. Hey, you! Stop!
Come here! The old Spaniard danced about as he shook his club
at me. Come here, boy! Come here, damn you!
I turned to the left, hearing the watchman’s whisde. Someone’s
ghost was running desperately behind me. Five or six figures
moved in the background, gesticulating and pointing. I could
hear their faint cries in the quiet street. I slowed down, but I was
85

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

afraid one of them might take another alley, cut me off, and be
standing there ahead of me, waiting. And it might be my accursed
father. Again I began to run as fast as I could. Til keep running
until I fall, I thought. Until I drop like a balloon that s had a pin
stuck into it.
In the cinema I lit a cigarette. From time to time I rubbed my
bleeding feet with the tips of my fingers. I imagined my father
coming towards me to seize my neck with his two powerful
hands. He has become the villain in the film. As if I were breaking
a feather between my fingers, I pulled the imaginary trigger. My
father dies. The lead is cooling off in his heart and brain. And the
blood runs from him as it runs, from the villain on the screen.
His legs quiver for the last time. I see my father trembling as my
hands tremble when I sit down to eat at his table. The man is
dead now. My father is dead. This is the way IVe always wanted
to kill him.
From the cinema I walked to the Feddane and sat down
on one of the stone benches. Many of them were occupied by
visitors from the country, now asleep. There were also men from
other cities who were passing through, and people who merely
did not want to sleep at home, like me. Boys, youths and old men
were sleeping all over the ground and on the benches like fish
stranded on a beach. Every litde while another arrived and lay
down. He would move about for a bit in the spot he had chosen,
getting himself comfortable, and then he would be quiet.
I had seventy-five pesetas on me, and I wanted to hide them.
But where?
86

FOR BREAD ALONE

I folded the notes tighdy and, taking care to see that no one
was watching, buried them in the dirt behind my bench beside a
rose-bush.
I slept. My father was chasing me. I felt a hand moving softly
in my pocket, but I did not move. My eyes were half-open. It
was a man, much older than I. Til let him look, unless he wants
to do more than look. That would be another story. I changed
my position so he could go through all my pockets. He stopped
searching. I waited for him to start again, but he walked away. I
catnapped and had reveries for the rest of the night. One dream
finishes in Tetuan and another begins in Tangier. Still in Tetuan,
but already in Tangier.

87

7

A

lready in Tangier, asleep again in a park. I had arrived that
evening.
I awoke in a fright. The boy was shaking me by the shoulder
and talking to me. Get up! Get up! A raid! The police are
coming.
I felt in my back trouser pockets. The sixty pesetas were gone.
As we ran, I said: They stole my money.
How much was it?
Sixty pesetas.
We slowed down. You’re lucky, he said.
We were both panting. W hat do you mean, lucky?
They didn’t rape you. W hen there are two or three of them, if
they don’t find anything on you, they rape you.
W hat’s sixty pesetas? I thought. My arse is worth a lot more
than that.
89

MOHAM ED C H O U K R I

We were in the neighbourhood of the graveyard at Bou
Araqia.
Where are we going?
Follow me and don’t talk. There’s nothing to worry about.
We walked into the world of silence. This was where my little
brother Abdelqader had been buried after my father had killed
him. W hen my father dies I’ll go to his grave and piss on it. I’ll
make his tomb into a latrine.
We were walking over the graves, and we stopped in front of
a walled-in family mausoleum. The boy leapt over the wall.
Jump. W hat are you waiting for?
I jumped. In a corner lay a pile of flattened cardboard boxes,
and he began to spread them out on the ground.
Here’s your place, he told me. Then he made his own spot.
I sat down and rested my elbows on my knees. Once he was
comfortable, he said: Where are you from?
The Rif.
So you’re a Rifftan, then?
That’s right.
And where are your people ?
In Tetuan.
You all live there ?
That’s right. We used to live here in Tangier, but then we
moved to Tetuan.
Did you run away?
Yes.
So did I.
90

FOR BREAD ALONE

Where are you from?
Djebel Habib.
He s a Djibli, then, I said to myself. Why did you run away?
He began to search in his pockets.
My fathers wife threw me out.
And your mother ?
\
She died. He pulled out two cigarette butts. Before offering
me one, he said: Do you smoke?
Yes.
He handed me one of the butts. I sniffed at it. Virginia
tobacco. He brought out a box of matches and lit it for me. I
inhaled a deep breath of smoke, and let it out. A delicious feeling
of peace descended upon me.
Do you know Tetuan well? I asked him.
Not very. I ran away and came here after only about two
months.
W hat does your father do?
Hes a street porter. And yours?
Nothing. He was in the Spanish army and he deserted. They
caught him and gave him two years. He hasn’t worked since he
got out of jail.
W ho works in your family?
My mother. She sells fruit and vegetables in Trancats.
And you? W hat did you do ?
Sometimes I worked for her at the stall and sometimes I had
other work.
Why did you run aWay?
91

M OHAM ED C H O U K R I

Because my father was always beating me up. Sometimes heel
hang me upside down from the branch of a tree and beat me with
his soldier s belt. That was when we lived in Ain Khabbes.
My father beat me every time his wife told him to.
And what do you do here ? I asked him.
I’m a street porter. W hat else do you expect me to do ? After a
moment of silence he said: I’m tired. I’m going to sleep.
It was about one in the afternoon when I went down to the
port. I felt very weak. At one of the waterfront cafes I asked for a
glass of water. Nearby was a stand that sold bean soup. Only one
peseta, and I could have a bowl. But where to find the peseta?
My life is not worth even one peseta now. After a few minutes
of walking in the strong sun I began to feel sharp pains in my
stomach. This sun will drive me crazy. I picked up a small fish
that lay on the pavement, and smelled it.
The odour was overpowering, unbearable. I peeled off the
skin. Then with disgust, with great disgust, I began to chew it. A
taste of decay, decay. I chew it and chew it but I cant swallow it.
I cant.
From time to time the small sharp stones hurt the soles of my
feet. They hurt. I went on chewing the fish as if it were a wad of
gum. It was like chewing gum. I spat it out. Its stink was still in my
mouth. I looked down with rage at the mass I had spat out. W ith
rage. I ground it into the pavement with my bare feet. I stepped on
it. I ground it under my feet. Now I chew on the emptiness in my
mouth. I chew and chew. My insides are growling and bubbling.
Growling and bubbling. I feel dizzy. Yellow water came up and
92

FOR BREAD ALONE

filled my mouth and nostrils. I breathed deeply, deeply, and
my head felt a litde clearer. Sweat ran down my face. Running,
running. I thought of the boy who had saved me from the police
last night. Why didn't he wake me up this morning? Why? Did
he try, and couldn’t because I was sleeping so heavily? Perhaps
he tried. I was sorry we had not given each other our names. I
was sorry. The fisherman sat in his boat, eating his loaf of bread.
He eats it, and I, I am eating it too as I watch. He leans over the
gunwale, and I watch him wearily. I watch and watch, thinking
that he may throw something away, something I can eat, as he
is eating. The monkey tied to the mast seizes something, and
nervously cracks it between its teeth. I hoped the fisherman was
chewing without pleasure, the way I had chewed my rotten fish.
I watched the loaf of bread avidly. He was gazing distractedly at
the waterfront skyline, running his eyes vaguely over old Tangier.
Throw away your bread now, the way I threw away my fish, I told
him silendy. He threw the bread into the water. A delicious taste
of salt filled my mouth. Delicious. A feeling of pleasure revived
my weak body. In spite of being so tired, I felt better. I stripped
off my shirt and trousers, and plunged into the water. I swam
beneath the bread and saw that the slab of meat that had been
inside it had already sunk to the bottom. There goes half my luck,
I thought. The fisherman began to laugh uproariously. I raised
my head towards him, my hand clutching the bread. I looked
at him and at the bitten piece of bread. Lumps of shit floated
all around me in the water. Floating, floating. I squeezed the
bread in my hand. It was spongy, and sticky with oil from the
93

MOHAM ED C H O U K R I

boats. That bear is laughing at me as though I were a big fish he
was going to catch. He s laughing at me. IVe swum into his net.
Inside. I began to swim towards the concrete steps, passingother
small lumps of shit and bread bobbing in the water in front of
my face, bobbing and bobbing. I pushed them away as I swam. In
my mind they became connected: bread and shit. Connected. A
litde water went down my throat, went down. I choked, choked.
There was pain in my head and chest. I climbed two of the steps.
On the third step I slipped and rolled back down into the water.
Again the water ran into my throat. Again. The idea came to me
that I was going to go on for ever, climbing up the steps only to
slip and fall back into the water. On and on. Even as I got to the
highest step, I imagined myself falling backwards into the bay.
Falling again. I was very careful where I placed my feet. My body
was covered with sticky oil. I picked up my shirt and trousers,
and started walking. On my way, I looked behind me and the
fisherman waving at me. Laughing. The sound of the laughing
dies away little by little. Dies away. Now he has stopped laughing.
Stopped.
He called after me, wheedling. Hey, boy! Come here! It’s only
a joke. Come on. Here’s another loaf of bread.
Poor kid, said the fisherman in the boat with him.
I did not turn around and go back towards them. The
humiliation was very great. Too great. Ahead of me on the
pavement there were some more small fish that had been trampled
on. Trampled underfoot. I raised my face to the sky. It was more
naked than the earth. More naked. The hot sun struck my face,
94

FOR BREAD ALONE

struck it. I began to tremble with fatigue. I tremble and shake.
I see a cat reclining comfortably in a shady corner. It looks at
me half-asleep, with indifference. Indifferent. Its white and black
belly rises and falls slowly, slowly. I picked up one of the small,
dry fish. Dry. It had a worse stench than the first one. Worse than
the first. I began to vomit yellow watei\ again. That was what I
wanted. I wanted it. I vomited and vomited, until only the sound
came out. Only the sound, the tight sound of retching. That was
what I wanted. I walked towards the beach, feeling empty, weak.
Now and then it seemed that I was about to fall and not get up
again. In order not to think about what had happened and what
might be going to happen, I began to look back at the footsteps I
was making in the sand. The waves broke over them shortly after
I made them. I watched my footsteps and the waves. I threw my
shirt and trousers down onto the sand and began to rub my body
with seaweed and sand. I rub and rub. My hair is even stickier
than my body. Stickier. I went on rubbing and rinsing until my
skin was red, red. The skin on my body was still sticky with oil,
but not so dirty as before.
In the afternoon, after wandering far and wide, I sat down
on some steps opposite the railway station. I did not manage to
carry any suitcases for the travellers who arrived. I failed. I did
not dare approach them. One of the porters yelled into my face:
Get back! Out of here! Go on! This was a good town until you
all landed here like a swarm of locusts!
They swore at me, spat on me, and shoved me away. A muscular
young man gave me a hard kick and chopped me on the back
95

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

of my neck. But I was determined to stay there. I stayed there.
Later I succeeded in persuading a European to let me carry his
suitcase. It was heavy. As I was lifting it up to carry it, a big man
grabbed me and began to swear at me. He managed to convince
the traveller that he was more capable of carrying the bag than I
was. Violently he yanked the handle out of my hand. Violently.
The situation has not changed at all so far. When I was seven or
eight years old I always dreamt about bread. And here I am at
sixteen still dreaming about it. Am I going to go on dreaming
about bread for ever? The cat on the fishermens pier was luckier
than I. It can eat fish out of the gutter without vomiting. Yes,
without vomiting. There s nothing left but begging or stealing.
But it seems to me that a beggar sixteen years old is not going
to collect much. Yes, it is difficult. Sebtaoui was right: begging
is a profession for children and old people. If a young man cant
find work, it s more shameful to beg than to steal. That s what
he used to say. I wonder where they are now, he and Abdeslam.
W ho knows?
A young man sat down near me and took out a pack of
black cigarettes. Do you smoke? he said. I turned my head and
answered weakly: Yes.
W hats the matter with you? Are you sick?
No.
He came nearer and I took a cigarette from him. He lighted a
match.
Thank you. Not now. Thanks.
He got up, saying: Wait for me. Til be back.
96

FOR BREAD ALONE

I smelled the cigarette. If I smoke it Til vomit again without
vomiting anything. The same as at noon. I heard the sound of a
plane flying overhead, and raised my eyes to the sky. The noise
slowly grew fainter, and I did not see the plane. A feeling of
sleepiness stole over me. I heard the young man talking. Here!
The cigarette had fallen from my hand. I must have slept. Yes,
IVe been asleep.
He was holding out half a loaf of bread stuffed with tinned
sardines. I saw a bottle of wine in his hand. He took a small glass
out of his pocket and filled it. W hen he had drunk, he refilled
it.
Raising the glass to his lips he said: Where are you from?
I answered as I ate. I’m from the Rif. My family lives in
Tetuan.
He emptied his glass again and licked his lips contentedly.
When did you come to Tangier?
Yesterday.
And where do you sleep ?
In the street.
I was happy eating. I swallowed some mouthfuls without
being able to chew them. He filled the glass and handed it to me.
Do you drink?
Yes, I said, and drank it at one gulp.
I began to feel things getter clearer. I smoked the cigarette
and had a second glass. When I had finished the third, he said:
Do you want to sleep at my house?
I looked at him surprised. His expression was not reassuring.
97

MOHAMED C HO UKR I

He wanted something of me, and I thought I knew what it was.
Yes, his eyes tell me thats what he wants.
No. Thank you. Thank you very much.
As you like. He shook a few drops of wine out of the glass and
put it into his pocket. See you again, he said.
Thank you. Goodbye.
I had almost told him that I slept in the graveyard. Luckily I
stopped in time to avoid such stupidity. I walked along the street
where the palm trees grew. The soft breeze revived me, and I saw
everything clearly in my mind. Then I stopped walking. From a
car an old man was signalling to me. W hat does he want? I went
over to the curb and leaned down to the window. He opened the
door and said to me in Spanish: Get in.
I got in and sat beside him. He drove slowly. jAdonde vamos?
I asked him. He made a circular motion with his hand. A paseo,
he said. A little paseo.
He wants something different, I thought. But I’m not afraid
of him. Just what is it he wants, though?
Are you from Tangier? he asked me.
No. I’m from Tetuan.
We were on the outskirts of town. Hes a maricon. That much
is certain, I thought.
He stopped the car in a dark section of the road. The lights
of the city sparkled in the distance. He turned on the overhead
light. So the short ride ends here. W ith a caressing movement he
runs his hand over my fly. And the other ride begins. Button by
button, very slowly, he unfastened the trousers, and my sex felt
98

FOR BREAD ALONE

the warmth of his breath. I did not dare look at his face or even
at his hand, whose warm pressure had made my sex rise up.
jBravo! he was saying. \Macho bravo!
He began to lick it and touch it with his lips, and at the same
time he tickled my crotch with his fingers. When he pulled half
of it down his throat, I felt his teeth. And if he bites it ? I thought.
The idea cooled my enthusiasm. To bring it back, I began to
imagine that I was deflowering Asiya in Tetuan. When I finished,
he still had me in his mouth. He took out his handkerchief and
wiped his lips. His face was congested, his eyes very wide, and
his mouth stayed open. I buttoned my fly and folded my arms
over my chest as if nothing had happened. Taking out a pack of
cigarettes, he offered me one and lighted it for me. Then he lit a
cigarette and turned on the radio. A beautiful calm music came
over the air. I sat enjoying it, and was reminded of Oran and my
work with the lovely Monique. Monique! Today its only a name,
to be remembered or forgotten.
We did not say a word to one another as we drove back to the
city. He gave me fifty pesetas and let me out near the place where
he had called to me. He shook my hand and said: Hasta la vista.
His hand was warm and smooth. I waved to him. Hasta la vista!
The air was full of smoke from the car.
They suck it for five minutes and they give you fifty pesetas.
Do they all suck, the ones who are like that old man? Are all the
maricones as nice as he was? Do all the ones who suck have cars,
and do they all give fifty pesetas? A new profession, to add to
begging and stealing. I must pick one of the three until a further
99

MOHA MED C HOUK R I

choice appears. One of the three or all of them, depending on
the circumstances. And why not? I took out the fifty-peseta note
and looked carefully at it. Then I folded it and put it back into
my pocket. I was afraid of losing it. If I had been that old man I
should have vomited. Does he get the same pleasure from sucking
me that I get from sucking a womans breast ? Does he get excited
while he does it? My sex still felt warm and sticky between my
thighs. Suddenly I was struck by my conscience. W hat I had
done was no different from what any whore does in the brothel.
My upright sex was worth fifty pesetas, looked at in that light.
I went into a little restaurant in the Zoco de Fuera and asked
for a plate of fried fish and half a loaf of bread. The two men
facing me were masons. On the table stood a one-litre Mobiloil
can. The three of us took turns drinking tepid water from it.
Each time I lifted it I smelled the foul odour it gave off. At the
other two tables there were working men, men out of work, and
thieves of various kinds. They all ate in silence. There were only
the sounds of spoons and dishes and kitchenware, and the voice
of the proprietor giving commands to the boy who assisted him.
From time to time one of those who has finished eating emits a
loud belch, followed by a drawn-out exclamation: E l hamdour
illah! I handed four pesetas to the proprietor and went out. It
had been hot inside the restaurant. Egyptian and Moroccan
music came from the cafes and restaurants. A young drunk,
naked to the waist, stood outside the door of one cafe, cursing
Allah in a piercing voice. Two other young men came out of the
caf£, forced him to lean over, and then poured a jar of water over
100

FOR BREAD ALONE

his head. Then they pushed him back into the cafe. I noticed that
they too were staggering. I thought again of the boy who had
saved me the night before from the police raid. I wonder if he is
asleep in the graveyard now. If I don’t find him there shall I sleep
there alone?
I went into a baqal and bought five Philip Morris cigarettes. I
was approaching the entrance of the cemetery, and it occurred to
me that a graveyard is the only place you can go into at any hour
of the day or night, without having to ask permission. They’re
right. Why should they have a guard here? There’s no money in
here. The dead are not afraid. They don’t get angry or hit anyone.
Each dead man is in his place. W hen his gravestone crumbles
they put another dead one in the same spot.
The cardboard boxes were piled in their place in the corner.
Have they caught him? W hat has happened to him? I spread out
some boxes on the ground. Perhaps he will come. I lit a cigarette,
took three wax matches and twisted them together to make a
torch. Then I held them up to inspect the writing on the marble
plaque. I saw from the numbers there that the person had lived
for fifty-one years. The numbers were all I could read. He or she,
I didn’t know which, was no longer living, and I was still here.
But what does it mean, a man who was alive and now isn’t ? W hat
does it mean, that I should be sleeping here in this corner of a
family grave? From the tiles and the well-kept plot I can see that
the family was a rich one. W hat does it mean to allow a man sixty
or seventy years old to suck on me and then give me fifty pesetas ?
There must be answers to these questions, but I don’t know them
101

MOHA MED C HO UK R I

yet. The questions come easily, but I am not sure of the answer to
any one of them. I thought the meaning of life was in living it. I
know the flavour of this cigarette because I’m smoking it, and it
is the same with everything. I smoked with great gusto, and then
I threw away the cigarette and went to sleep.
I awoke early. A new boy lay asleep in the place of the other
one who had saved me. Quickly I felt to see if what remained of
the fifty pesetas was still in my pocket. My fortune was there. The
boy had been right when he said there was no safer place than
the cemetery. I think the human race respects its members more
when they are dead than when they are alive.
At Bab el Fahs I bought a pair of rubber-soled alpargatas for
fifteen pesetas. My feet were dirty. I had breakfast in a cafe and
smoked the first cigarette of the day happily. A new day to live
through. W hat shall I do during this new day? W ill I manage to
pick somebody’s pocket the way Sebtaoui and Abdeslam do in
Tetuan? Why not ? I must try before what money I have left gives
out.
In the middle of the morning I walked into a market. A
European woman was buying something at a stall. She paid and
put her change purse back into her handbag. Then she caught
sight of me, staring fixedly at the handbag. Her eyes seemed to
be saying: Aren’t you ashamed? And so I felt ashamed, and went
out of the market. I spent the whole day letting the alleys swallow
me up and spew me out. In the evening I discovered that you
could sleep in the Fondaq ech Chijra. You paid only one peseta
at the gate in order to get in, and you could sleep where you liked.
102

FOR BREAD ALONE

There are two levels. The animals sleep below and the people
above. It was nine o’clock when I went in. A cafe, a restaurant,
small rooms they rented out, shops, fruit and vegetable stands.
The Fondaq is like a city. On the stairway I ran into a drunk. He
reached out to touch my face, saying: Aha, gazelle! Where are
you off to, beautiful? I pushed his hand away violendy, ran up
two steps and glared at him. He guffawed.
W hat are you so nervous about? Afraid of me?
In his hand he held an empty bottle. Im going to fill up this
bottle, he said. Ill be back.
He went on downstairs, laughing, and I continued up, feeling
more frightened each minute. He called back to me: Wait for me,
handsome. Ill be right up. Im not going to let you get away.
There were scores of men on the balcony, some of them
already asleep, but most of them sitting up, drinking, smoking
kif, chatting and singing. I caught sight of a drunk hugging a boy.
Then he kissed him on the cheeks. One of the others cried: Leave
him alone! Not now! Later, later.
No. Im not going to sleep here, I told myself. I’d rather sleep
in the graveyard.
As I started to go back, someone called to me. Hey, beautiful!
Come over here with us and make us happy. I did not turn to
look. My heart was pounding. I must buy a knife or a razor. I
ran down the stairs very fast, stopping,only when I got to the
animals quarters. Luckily human beings are not the only thing
in the world. I walked over to a dark corner and sat down. Then I
smoked a cigarette. Did Allah mean to make the world like this,
103

MOHA MED CH OUK RI

with such disorder and confusion? The smell of the beasts was
very strong. A mare stood beside me. I folded my arms on my
knees, bent over, and fell asleep. I slept sitting up because I was
afraid of being raped.
All at once I was being drenched with warm, pungent water. I
jumped up, terrified. W hats that? I cried. The last drops of urine
are still trickling from the mare’s puckering hole. She takes a step
backwards. Quickly I get out of the way, in case she kicks.
At the door the guard asked me if I was coming back.
No! I cried with feeling. I’m not! I’ll never come back!
Why? W hats the matter? Did they do something to you?
Yes. A mare pissed all over me while I was asleep.
W hat were you doing sleeping down there? W hy didn’t you
sleep upstairs on the balcony? Go to a hammam and wash before
you go to sleep, or you’ll be sick.
Keep your advice for yourself, I told him. He slammed the
gate after me.
The air was tepid and the streets were empty. Where to go
now? To the baths? And my clothes? I am soaked through. I
began to scratch.
Three drunks sat singing in front of the entrance to the old
Jewish cemetery. As I went past, one of them called to me. Come
here! Where are you going?
I looked over my shoulder and kept walking.
Come on, gazelle! He stood up unsteadily and began to
follow me. One of the others said: Let him go. Come back here.
The street leading up to the Zoco de Fuera seemed to be the
104

FOR BREAD ALONE

best way out. As I ran I looked back and saw the drunk sitting
down again with the others.
I bought a cake of soap in the Zoco Chico. The square was
filled with drunks, whores, maricones and beggars. In the Calle de
la Marina near the Djamaa el Kbira two Moroccan police stopped
me.
Your papers, said the first.
I haven’t got any papers.
Where do you live ?
In Tetuan.
Hearing this, the second one demanded: Where in Tetuan?
In Trancats. Behind the Jewish baths.
Do you know Moulay Ali ?
He’s a neighbour of ours.
W hat are you doing here ?
Nothing. I came to look for work.
And where are you going now ?
I was sleeping in the Fondaq ech Chijra and a mare pissed on
me.
A mare!
Yes, a mare. I was asleep downstairs with the animals.
The two men looked at each other, and the second asked me:
Do you know where Dar Debbagh is ?
No.
Come with us.
At the corner he pointed out the place, saying: Go in there.
You’ll find a fountain. Wash yourself, and in the morning wash
105

MO HA MED C H O UK R I

your clothes.
The water at the fountain was warm. After I had bathed, I
washed my trousers and shirt by trampling them underfoot.
Now and then from the nearby cafe there was the sound of men s
voices as they argued over their card games. A man staggered out
and came over to me.
W hat are you doing? Are you crazy, washing your clothes at
night?
I stopped stamping and explained why I was doing it.
A mare!
Yes. A mare.
Mmmm, he said at length. I see. Well, take a good wash.
When I had finished, there were my wet shirt and trousers on
the ground in front of me. There was no other solution. I wrung
them out as much as I could, and put them back on.
I stopped walking when I came near to the railway station.
Shall I sleep in a freight car or go to the beach? On the sand
nobody will ask me any questions, whereas a guard can come
through the freight car. The main thing is: will I be able to protect
myself against someone bigger than lam?
Again I heard in my head the words of the boy who had taken
me to the graveyard: If they don’t find anything to steal on you
they rape you. I had more than twenty pesetas in my pocket.
Will that be enough to protect me? Maybe the boy was right,
but he was talking about what they do in the middle of the city.
On the beach, or in a freight car, though, they could rob you first
and rape you afterwards. They could even cut your throat. And
106

FOR BREAD ALONE

on the beach who could hear? So its the freight car. I climbed
the wall and let myself down. I could feel the sharp points of the
gravel through the soles of my alpargatas, and I worried that they
would cut through. I went along slowly, carefully, until I came
to the first freight car. I climbed into it and lit a match. It was
empty.
Suppose someone comes along and attacks me, I thought
again. I jumped down to the ground and picked out the two
sharpest stones I could find. As I climbed back up into the car I
heard the soft sound of cloth ripping. My trousers.
Bad luck! I threw myself down on the floor. One stone was in
my hand and the other lay beside me, near my head. I must buy
a knife. Or at least a razor-blade. And IVe got to find a friend
somewhere in this city. W hat has become of the boy who saved
me ? Is he staying away from the graveyard on purpose ? How long
will I have to go on living by myself? Ought I to go on accepting
this life as it comes up each day, or not?

107

8

W

e were in the Cafe Chato, and I had just lost my last
centimo playing aaita. W hen we had begun to play,
my friend el Kebdani was winning and I was losing. I had had
twenty-five pesetas left, and el Kebdani told me: This isn’t your
lucky day. Stop playing.
Don’t worry about me, I told him sharply. I can manage
myself and my money.
Now, a little after noon, el Kebdani had just lent me five
pesetas. I bought three pesetas’ worth of k if and paid two for a
glass of green tea. We were sitting up on the balcony; through
the little window I could see the whole Zoco de Fuera in front of
me. It was Sunday. The big square was crowded with circulating
salesmen and buyers, as well as the others who were walking
through without buying anything. The wind had come up and
the sky was dark with clouds. All the Moroccan establishments
109

MO HA MED C HOUK R I

were shut - restaurants, cafes and shops. Above each doorway
there was a Moroccan flag, and tacked beside it a black flag. In
some cafes the owners sat playing cards, treating the day as one of
leisure. Earlier that morning I had asked Chato what the holiday
meant. It s a bad day, he answered in a voice that came half from
his. mouth and half through his nose.
And what does a bad day mean?
You don’t know ?
No.
I’ll tell you. The thirtieth of March nineteen twelve was the
day when the French began to protect Morocco. That was under
Moulay Hafid. And today s the thirtieth of March nineteen fiftytwo, so its forty years of protection. And that’s why it’s a bad
day.
But what do we want the French to do today?
Don’t you know what we want them to do ?
No. What?
We want them to get out! The Protectorate was supposed to
last forty years. It expires today.
Do we want the Spanish to get out too?
He looked at me with annoyance. Listen, I haven’t got time
to talk about it now. Go up onto the balcony and ask one of your
friends to tell you all about it.
El Kebdani had won about three hundred pesetas, when he
suddenly announced he was quitting.
Finish the game with us, one of the players said angrily.
Suppose I don’t feel like it? I have to go on playing anyway?
110

FOR BREAD ALONE

No, but its not logical to stop now. YouVe won everything we
had. Finish the game out to the end, since you’re the winner.
I’m hungry, el Kebdani said. I’m going to get some lunch.
We’re all hungry, they told him. Play cards.
If you don’t want to finish the game, divide your winnings.
That’s right. Makes sense. That’s the thing to do, unless you
want to go on with the game.
El Kebdani laughed sarcastically, and took the sebsi I had
filled for him.
I’m warning you. You’d better finish this game.
It looked as if there were going to be trouble. Chato yelled up:
I don’t want noise in my cafe! Go out into the street if you feel
like killing each other.
W hen the gamblers had thinned out, Chato had gone back
downstairs. Usually he stayed on the balcony keeping track of the
winnings so he could collect his commission. W hen he had left, I
had thought to myself: He wants us out of here. The stakes aren’t
worthwhile.
Suddenly a furious voice came up from the Zoco de Fuera.
People! People! Moroccan patriots! This is a black day. Exactly
forty years ago today, in nineteen twelve, the French signed the
treaty of the Protectorate over Morocco. And we’re still not
free.
We all crowded around the window. It’s crazy el Merouani, the
one who sells the pastries in the Zoco Chico, said el Kebdani.
W hat’s he saying?
W hat can he say? He’s completely out of his head. He’s just
111

MOHA MED C H OUK R I

having some fun with them.
They say he s an informer for the Spanish.
It wouldn’t surprise me.
You shouldn’t say it unless you’re sure. Where’d you hear
that?
I know. He belongs to a secret party run by some Spanish
who want to get rid of the International Zone so they can run
Tangier by themselves.
Again Chato yelled from below:
That’s enough up there! I don’t want to hear any politics in
this cafe! Go out into the Zoco if you feel like talking politics or
fighting.
El Merouani went on shouting in his wild voice, shaking his
arms excitedly in the air. Out with colonialism!
Out! Out! shouted the crowd.
Long live free and independent Morocco!
Aache! cried the crowd.
Down with the traitors! screamed el Merouani.
Yasqot!
Holy war, in the name of Allah!
E ljihad! E l jihad ya ‘ibad Allah!
A Djibliya woman in a straw hat climbed up onto a wooden
crate and began to scream: Youyouyouyouyouyouyou!
We ran downstairs and stood looking out over the barrage of
benches and tables that were stacked in front of the entrance.
In his half-mouth, half-nose voice Chato said: Either go
outside or back upstairs. Out or up!
112

FOR BREAD ALONE

I leapt over the barricade and stood outside. Are you coming
or not? I called to el Kebdani. He hesitated a moment, and then
jumped too.
Come back here! cried one of the players. Don’t listen to
fuckface there.
The fuckface is your mother, I told him.
He spat at me across the barricade, and I spat back at him.
Then he threw a bench out at me. I dodged it, and insulted his
mother again.
We’ll see about this later, he said. I’ll show you who’s who.
When I get hold of you I’ll spit up your ass!
I grabbed my groin and shouted: Come and get it!
Kill each other outside, Chato was saying. Go on out, all of
you!
El Kebdani pulled me ahead by the arm. Shit on their mothers,
I told him. They want you to stay there. They think maybe they’ll
be able to get some of their money back.
I was born a long time ago, he said. I know what the sons of
bitches want.
They were cheating. Did you notice ?
I noticed, yes. But they’re idiots. I could follow everything
they were doing.
El Merouani was beckoning to the excited crowd, trying to
make it go in the direction he wanted. We came nearer to the
multitude.
Most of these people are from somewhere else, said el Kebdani.
They’re not from Tangier.
113

MOHA MED CH OUK RI

Where do you think they’re from?
The Rif, most of them. Can’t you tell by their faces? Look at
them! They’re Riffians! Aren’t they Riffians?
You’re right. They certainly look like it. They’re from our
country.
The crowd had begun to run towards the main bus stop.
Piles of stones lay here and there because the street was being
repaved. The men were collecting the stones. Then they went in
four principal directions: up the Calle del Estatuto, down the
Cuesta de la Playa, through the gate of Bab el Fahs, and into the
narrow Semmarine where the money-changers stood. There was
another group that ran up to the police station at the top of the
steps and began to throw rocks. El Kebdani and I followed the
crowd that had gone into the Semmarine. They were stoning a
policeman. Some of the stones hit his head. His white helmet
fell onto the pavement. The blood ran down his face. He put one
hand on the top of his head and the other on the holster of his
revolver, and began to run towards the Zoco de Fuera, followed
by the stone-throwers. One of them suddenly turned and hurled
a rock at a large clock that hung over the entrance to an Indian
bazaar. The clock said 1.15 when he smashed it. Then they broke
the windows of a shoe store and a camera store beside it.
Let’s get some of those watches and cameras, I said.
No.
Why not?
Because we don’t know yet what’s going to happen. They
could stop us and search us.
114

FOR BREAD ALONE

But look at them all grabbing the watches over there!
Let them grab, if they want. And if they jump into a well, are
you going to jump in, too?
There was the crash of more plate glass being broken.
You’re crazy, I told him. You’re afraid! I didn’t think you were
like that.
You’re the crazy one. Steal by yourself, if you want.
Shots rang out from the region of the police station.
The police have begun shooting, said el Kebdani. Look at
what they’re doing to the Zapateria Rex!
A group of men came running in our direction, all of them
carrying rocks. Women and children were screaming. The
peddlers and stall-keepers were abandoning their merchandise
and fleeing. El Kebdani pulled my arm. Come on! Run!
We rushed and hid behind the booth of a Jewish money­
changer almost at the entrance of the market. The smashing of
the shop windows continued in the Plazuela Perez Gald6s, and
the sound of shooting was coming closer. Everyone is running
and crying out. The shots are very near. I raised my head and
peered out. A man was rolling on the pavement in front of us,
blood pouring from him. A Moroccan policeman ran behind,
nervously brandishing his revolver.
Duck! cried el Kebdani. Do you want them to kill us?
Look through this crack, I told him. Can you see all right?
Yes. I can see.
I think that one’s dead. He’s not moving.
I see him. But shut up.
115

MOHAMED C H OUK R I

People run and shout. The rapid gunfire comes closer.
A Moroccan youth tried to crawl in with us. We pushed him
away. Find another place! Yes, get out of here! Theres no room
here for you.
Or stay out there where you are until they shoot you, I
added.
Three other youths halted in their flight and stood still near
us. The two taller ones helped the shorter one climb up onto the
roof of a shop. Once he was up there, he looked around quickly
and called down: Lets get out of here fast!
The continuous gunfire was louder. A cry, and there is the
thump of a body falling to the pavement.
They’ve got another, I said.
I’m listening and watching, he told me.
A policeman appeared, carrying a machine-gun. As he
passed, the short youth uttered a cry, and leapt down on top of
him from the roof. We both raised our heads above the booth.
The policeman is lying face down, with the young man on top
of him, hammering his head with his fist as if he were pounding
a nail.
Do you know who that policeman is? said el Kebdani.
No.
That’s Inspector Barcia. His father’s Moroccan and his mother
Spanish.
The youth rose and picked up the machine-gun that lay a
few feet away. Jerkily he turned it this way and that, trying to
understand how it worked. But it was no use. He had no idea.
116

FOR BREAD ALONE

The Inspector lay there unconscious.
Suddenly the young man raised the machine-gun with both
hands above his head and, uttering an oath, threw it to the ground
with all his might.
Inaal dinek!
Then another policeman appeared,* firing one shot after
another. The short youth spun around, crying out. The policeman
fired again, this time hitting him in the belly. He fell and rolled
into the gutter.
He got it in the back and front, I said.
I’m watching.
IVe never seen a man shot before, I said. Only in the movies.
Well, nowyou’re seeing it before your eyes, said el Kebdani.
They must be killing people like this all over town.
W hat do you expect them to do?
El Kebdani s forehead was covered with sweat.
Keep calm, I told him.
W hat are you talking about? he demanded. I don’t need your
advice.
You’re trembling, though, I said.
I’m not trembling, he whispered furiously. Can’t you shut
up? Do you want them to spill our guts here, like that one out
there?
W hat a coward you are, I murmured.
All right. I’m a coward. But shut up.
A third policeman came into view, shooting one shot into the
air. He helped the other one lift: the Inspector from the ground
117

MOHA MED CH OUK RI

where he had been lying. The other picked up the machine-gun
and put the Inspector’s cap on his head for him. How do you
feel? he asked him.
I’m all right. Just dizzy.
I got that dog, the policeman told him.
They walked over to the youth. One of them moved him
with his foot. Then they turned and began to run down the hill
towards the Zoco Chico.
Lets get out of here, whispered el Kebdani.
Where to ?
Anywhere. If they find us in here we’re finished.
There was the sound of more shots approaching.
Come on. Fast, he said.
I climbed out first. Look! The boys moving. Hes still alive!
Hurry! El Kebdani pulled me by the arm. Do you want them
to get us too?
We saw the three policemen running down the Siaghines.
And we ran down the Calle el Mansour. Halfway down the hill
el Kebdani stopped. Wait a minute. IVe got to piss.
I felt the need, too. As we stood there leaning against the
door of a shop, people came running by. Ahead of us in the
Saqqaya we saw a young man lurching along, leaning heavily to
the right under the weight of the bag he was carrying. We’re in
luck, said el Kebdani. Here’s Qaabil. We’ll go with him up to
his shack at Sidi Bouknadel.
El Kebdani had often spoken about Qaabil and how he had
worked for him as a cargador.
118

FOR BREAD ALONE

Is that the smuggler you told me about ? I said. The one who
has so much money?
Thats the one. Hes got enough to bury you and me from
head to foot.
He doesn’t look as if he had a hundred pesetas in the world, I
told him.
The litde square was empty of people. Occasionally a few
men ran across it in one direction or another.
Qaabil! cried el Kebdani.
Qaabil stopped walking and set the bag down on the
pavement.
Where are you going? el Kebdani asked him.
To the shack. Come on with me. Sallafa’s there with Bouchra.
I’ve shaved the dirty bitch’s hair and eyebrows.
Qaabil and I carried the bag between us as we climbed the
steps in the direction of Amrah.
W hat’s going on? el Kebdani asked him.
I don’t know. When I came out of the bodega there was a lot
of running around. I didn’t see anything more.
Didn’t you hear the shots ?
I heard a few, but they were a long way off, and I couldn’t find
out what was happening.
The police are shooting at the Moroccans, said el Kebdani.
W hat for?
It’s the thirtieth of March.
And what are the Moroccans fighting with? asked Qaabil.
Rocks. W hat do you expect them to fight with?
119

MOH AMED CH OUK R I

Are there many dead?
They’re shooting at everybody they see, if he’s a Moroccan.
A voice from behind us shouted: Clear the way!
A man was carrying a wounded friend on his back, while a
third walked behind.
W ho’s the friend with you? Qaabil asked el Kebdani. W hat
does he do?
He used to sell soup and fish in the street, and he worked at a
restaurant in the Zoco de Fuera.
Qaabils shack was built at the very edge of the high cliffs
above the Sidi Bouknadel beach. One of its doors opened onto
the cliff. The other gave onto an alley that led downward in the
direction of Amrah. It was a real smuggler’s shack.
When we went in, Sallafa was groaning a song of Farid el
Attache s: Forget him whoforgetsyou, and dont regret his loss. Her
hair and eyebrows had been cleanly shaved with a razor, so that
now she looked like a handsome boy. She wore a lightweight,
black and white striped zigdoun. Bouchra was stretched out
on the divan in a red and gold brocade caftan with a gauzy dfin
over it. She had a sebsi in her hand. The girls put me in mind of
the three days I had spent with Abdeslam and Sebtaoui at Sida
Aziza’s house, back in Tetuan. I had a thousand pesetas in my
pocket at that time, I thought. And today, holes in my pockets
and no work.
A tajine of fish and potatoes sat on the taifor, ready to be
served. Sallafa brought us the tas with a ketde of water and a cake
of soap, so we could wash our hands. She nearly lost her balance
120

FOR BREAD ALONE

while she was pouring the water for el Kebdani. When my turn
came she smiled at me. She poured, smiled, and poured again,
holding the kettle unsteadily. W hen she got to Qaabil she began
to laugh. He seemed annoyed with her, and pulled the kettle
away from her, crying: Let go of that, you dirty whore!
Always talking about your mother, she said.
He made as if to slap her. El Kebdani intervened, taking up
the kettle and beginning to pour the water over Qaabils hands.
The next time I w ont just cut off your hair and eyebrows. Ill
drop you off the cliff out there.
Try it if you dare, she told him. Just try it, and well see who
goes over the cliff.
Aren’t you two ever going to stop? Bouchra cried.
The tajine was excellent, and very heavily spiced. We sat
around the table afterwards, until five in the afternoon, mainly
talking about the trouble in the streets as we drank our wine,
smoked our kif, and listened to old records by Om Kaltoum.
I had already fallen asleep on the divan, when el Kebdani
called out my name sharply. Mohamed! We re going out. Stay
here with the two girls until we get back. Go back to sleep if you
like.
All right. I’ll sleep a little.
I heard them shut the door and turn the key in the lock. Sallafa
and Bouchra both lay asleep, Bouchra on her right side facing the
wall. Sallafa lay on her stomach, with her face also towards the
wall. She lay like someone who had been dragged out of the sea.
It seemed to me that her buttocks needed to be given first-aid
121

MOHA MED CH OUK RI

treatment. As I was dropping off to sleep, I heard her move. Then
she said: Has that dog gone out?
Slowly I opened my eyes. She had got up and was turning on
the light. So you weren’t asleep after all, I thought.
She stretched in such a way that she managed to project her
bosom and her buttocks at the same time. Then she stood up
straight and looked at me archly. Her eyes seemed half-asleep.
Are you asleep too? she asked me.
I pulled myself up into a sitting position. I’m just resting a
little, I said.
She lifted the half-empty bottle of wine and indicated the
two glasses on the table. Come into the other room so we won’t
wake up Bouchra.
Shall I go in or not? I said to myself. Why not? She’s the boss
here, the mistress of the house.
When I got to my feet I realized that my head was heavy.
There was a dull pain in my right temple. I glanced at Bouchra,
wondering if she too were awake. She’s attractive, but I don’t dare
go near her.
W hat difference does it make? I thought. I’ll follow Sallafa
into the other room. Women have their own system. They know
how to act in such cases.
I walked into the room. It was a completely furnished
bedroom, not at all what I had expected to see in a shack. In one
corner there was a high pile of cartons. Perhaps they contained
some of Qaabil s contraband. She was sitting on the edge of the
bed. I sat down on a couch facing her.
122

FOR BREAD ALONE

Sit over here by me, she told me.
I hesitated.
Are you afraid of Qaabil?
It s not that, I finally said. I just met him. El Kebdani and I
were in the street when they were shooting. We were on our way
down from the Zoco de Fuera to the Saqqaya.
Even if he finds you here with me, he wont do anything. I
know him. A dog that barks.
He might not do anything, I was thinking, looking at her. He
might just throw me out of the shack and go on living with you,
if he loves you. And there’s no doubt he loves you. From what
IVe seen and heard, its you who manages him, and that means
he loves you.
I rose and went to sit beside her on the bed. She filled the
two glasses herself. Then she reached out to the table beside the
bed and lit a cigarette. Her eyelashes were black and her eyes
were bloodshot. She placed the cigarette between my lips and
lit a second one. I thought of Lalla Harouda back at the brothel
in Tetuan, and of how she had done the same thing. Today
everything is different. Today is better than yesterday.
And if Bouchra should wake up? I said.
She’s my sister.
Your sister!
Well, like my sister.
Ah! I see.
She smiled as she looked at me. Her lips are tiny, like a ring
for the finger. I had heard that a small mouth on a girl indicated
123

MOHAMED CH OUK RI

a very tight sex. I smiled back at her. She finished her drink. I was
thinking of the boy who had been shot by the police. She took my
hand and lay back, looking up at the ceiling as she smoked. From
time to time she squeezed my hand. She too must be thinking of
something. Her hand is warm. Her long slim fingers seem made
to nibble on. I lay down beside her and smoked, staring up at a
doll that hung on the wall. I press her fragile hand, thinking of
the boy who had come and tried in vain to get behind the booth
with us. I felt sorry now that we had not let him in.
The short young man sprang, landing on top of the policeman.
He pounds his head as if he were driving in a nail. The second
policeman comes, and he is rolling on the pavement.
We stayed a while quietly, she with her hand in mine. I
wondered if Qaabil enjoyed tranquil moments like this with her.
She stirred. So did I. We looked at each other and smiled.
Wait, she said. Til undress. She snuffed out her cigarette in
the ashtray. Ideas of ecstasy tickled the inside of my head as she
pulled off her clothing. Her panties are pink and she wears no
brassiere. Her breasts are tiny, like two lemons. My mind went
back to the time when I had sucked the oranges on the tree
woman at Oran.
Get undressed.
It s better if I keep my clothes on. If Qaabil and el Kebdani
should come back I wouldn’t have time to get dressed.
They w ont be back for another three or four hours, she said.
Where do you think they went?
I don’t know. He never tells me where hes going. But
124

FOR BREAD ALONE

whenever he goes out he stays a long time, especially if he has
one of his friends with him, because then he feels more daring
and does crazier things. Maybe they’ve gone to the whorehouse
together. That’s what I think, if you want to know.
Her face was heart-shaped, white, with pink cheeks. It was
also the face of a boy. I shut my eyes and let my head fall onto
her warm breast. A pillow of flesh, I said to myself. IVe got my
head on a pillow thats pulsing with life. All I could think of was
the cushion under my head, and how beautifully it calmed the
pain in my temple. She buried her fingers deep in my hair, and
I reached out blindly for her head, forgetting that it had been
shaved. The hard short hairs tickled my palm. When I rubbed
them the wrong way they stood up. Why did he shave off her
hair and eyebrows? He must have been jealous. I licked the hard
nipples. Then with delight I began to suck on her right breast,
filling my mouth with it. I could feel the tight hard part in the
middle of the softness. W hen I tried to do the same with her left
breast, she laughed, squirmed, and covered it with her hand. She
tries to direct me back to the right breast, and I keep insisting on
the left one. The left breast must be very sensitive. It becomes a
game, and soon she cannot bear to have either breast touched.
We go on for a litde while with the game, both of us laughing.
I’m ticklish on that side.
You’re ticklish on both sides now.
She laughed and pulled offher panties. Then with a smile she
unbuttoned my fly. The blind dragon rose up and stood rigid in
her hand. She smoothed it briefly from its head to its roots, and
125

MO HA MED C HOUK R I

set to work rubbing it against the lip between her legs. The hairs
of the black triangle there are as rough as those on her scalp. The
dragon feels the roughness as he scrapes his bald head on them.
I want to go inside, but she wants only to rub. She squeezes
it, chokes it, measuring its size at one end and the other with
her hand. I pulled away from her. Then she let me inside and
hugged me with her arms and legs. I imagined talking to my sex:
There you are, dragon! Blind and bald. This is your first combat
in Tangier. Fix it so she’ll never forget you. Be strong whether
you like it or not.
It was Bouchras voice that awoke me. Get up, Sallafa! Are
you asleep?
I sat up quickly. Has el Kebdani come back? I asked her.
Not yet.
I went out into the larger room. From there I heard Sallafa
saying to Bouchra: Hasn’t the pimp got here yet?
Im afraid they may have arrested them and taken them to the
police station, with all the trouble in the street.
They can take them all the way to Hell, Sallafa said.
I went into the latrine. My sex was limp and stuck to my
thighs. I came out and sat down with Bouchra. She seemed
preoccupied, even sad. I watched her. Something was bothering
her. Sallafa bustled in, she looked at me, smiled, and came over to
me, leaning above me. Then she took my face in her two hands,
and stroked it. Finally she gave me a resounding kiss on the lips,
the way one kisses a baby. I smiled.
She went into the latrine and shut the door. I remembered
126

FOR BREAD ALONE

the day in Ain Ketiout when the girl gave me brown bread with
butter and honey and put perfume on me and kissed my lips, and
I told her I was leaving with my family for Tetuan. Where can
she be now ? Its a different situation here with Sallafa. I looked at
Bouchra, sitting dejectedly with her elbows on her knees and her
head between her hands. The way she sat teminded me of the way
my mother had sat after she had heard that they had caught my
father. Presently she got up, went to the phonograph and put on
a record. Oukkeddibou Nafsi it was, with Om Kaltoum singing.
It made me think of Ain Khabbes in Tetuan and the hashishsmokers and drunks at the cafe where I had worked.
The key turned in the door and I sat up. El Kebdani came in
first, then Qaabil. They looked tired.
W hat news? I asked el Kebdani.
He turned down the volume on the phonograph.
It s all over, he said. A lot of Moroccans are dead or
wounded.
Qaabil went into the bedroom. El Kebdani sat down facing
me. Sallafa came out of the latrine.
Where have you been? she asked el Kebdani.
We had something to do.
Why don’t you admit you went to a whorehouse? she said,
laughing. You went to Seoudiya el Kahalas. Or else it was Zohra
el Hamqat s.
Before el Kebdani could answer, Qaabil shouted: Are you
going to shut that dirty mouth?
Whose dirty mouth? Yours?
127

MOHA MED CH OUK RI

She went into the bedroom. El Kebdani got to his feet.
Lets go out for a litde while, he said. We can come back
later.
We went out through the other door that gave onto the cliffs
and the beach below. The cold wind slapped my face. We lit
cigarettes and stood there. The lights of the ships anchored in
the harbour were brilliant.
IVe got something important to tell you, said el Kebdani.
W hat is it?
Qaabil has agreed to let you work with us tomorrow.
Yes. That is important, I said.
But on one condition. You have to stay up here at the shack
tonight and all day tomorrow. At least, until the time comes to
go to work.
I was thinking: Thats just what I want. It s a condition that’s
fine with me.
To him I said: But why?
I’ll tell you why. Qaabil doesn’t know you yet, and he’s afraid
you might talk to somebody.
And you? You think He interrupted me. No! But then, I know you. I told him
about you, and that persuaded him. I said you were serious and
honest and tough.
Good, I said.
You see, he’s had a lot of trouble with his cargadores. He’s
sure the only reason he had this run-in with the Customs and
the secret police was that he used new cargadores. Half the time
128

FOR BREAD ALONE

its the police themselves who send out the cargadores to work
with the smugglers. That way they find out where the work’s
going to be done, what time it’s going to happen, and even
what’s going to be moved in. The police give them three or four
times as much as the smugglers do.
I didn’t know that, I said.
They feel protected, you see. After a pause he went on: Qaabil s
a good man. The only trouble with him is that hes stingy. If you
want to get whats coming to you, you practically have to steal it
from him.
I laughed.
He’s only generous with women. W ith girls like Sallafa, for
instance.
We both laughed. Is he jealous of her ? I asked him.
He knows she’ll open her legs to anything. Even a monkey.
And in spite of that he loves her?
That’s right.
But why did he shave off her hair?
He’s crazy about her. He cut off her hair and eyebrows so she
wouldn’t go very far from the shack. Sometimes she’ll wander off
and stay ten days or more, and he’s like a maniac the whole time.
Where does she go when she runs away like that?
She gets drunk and stays with friends. Where would she go?
Do you think she loves him?
He laughed. Yes, she loves him, he said with irony. Does a
woman like that love anybody? All she wants is the cash. I’ve
heard her say it straight out. One day I heard her tell him: You’re
129

MO HA MED CH OUK R I

wasting your time with me. Look for another one to love, she
said. Get it into your head that I don’t love you!
And what does he say when she talks to him like that ?
W hat do you expect him to say? Either he doesn’t answer, or
he threatens to beat her up. But I’ve never seen him lift a finger
to her.
IVe noticed. But in spite of all she says, he still loves her. Hes
a strange one.
He thinks she’s worked magic on him.
And you? Do you think she’s got him under a spell?
I don’t believe in spells, he said. He loves her, and that’s all
there is to it.
But how did he ever manage to cut offher hair?
He got her drunk, and then he put hashish in her tea. When
she passed out he got to work on her with the razor.
And when she woke up ?
She smashed a few dishes and swore she’d get even with him.
But she’s like him. She won’t do anything.
And Bouchra?
Bouchra’s her best friend. Sallafa goes crazy when she’s
separated from her.
Hasn’t Bouchra got a lover?
I don’t know, he said slowly. I think the only one she likes is
herself. She’s hard to get on with. But she’s a nice girl. Not a mean
bone in her body. She only talks when she has to.
I saw that.
We lighted more cigarettes. I thought of telling him what had
130

FOR BREAD ALONE

happened between me and Sallafa, but I was afraid he might turn
out to be jealous, or might envy me for my good fortune. Or he
might go out of loyalty to Qaabil and tell him.
W hen we went back into the shack the penetrating voice of
Om Kaltoum was singing:
I ’m jealous ofthe lucky glass that touches your lips.
A nd I would stop it from reaching them.

131

9

A

ll morning Sallafa and I stayed at the shack. Qaabil and el
Kebdani had gone without giving me any idea of their
plans. Bouchra had decided to visit her mother, whom she had
not seen in several days. I assumed that Qaabil and el Kebdani
had gone to arrange for the passage of the contraband that we
would be moving later.
Sallafa was cleaning the bedroom. I reclined in the sala
smoking, uneasy in my mind. I called out to her: Have you got a
glass of wine in there ?
She loomed in the doorway. Wait a minute. We’ll open a
bottle and drink it together. She smiled and disappeared.
We’ve really begun a game of love, I said to myself. The present
situation here in the shack made me think of the morning long
ago when the owner of the pear tree in Ain Ketiout had shut
me into his storeroom. But I also saw differences. At least I am
133

MOH AME D CH OUK R I

free now to decide whether to stay or leave, even though leaving
would mean breaking down the door.
I rose and stood on the divan, leaning out of the window
and looking down at the sea below. The sky was cloudy and the
water was rough. A few ships, both large and small, were going
by. She came up and stood behind me, putting her hands on my
shoulders.
W hat are you looking at ? she murmured. I could feel the heat
of her breath in my ear. Have I become her lover? Poverty and
love go together. W hat a world!
I’m looking at the ocean. IVe never been on a ship in my life,
have you?
Who, me? Ask me instead if IVe ever been outside Tangier.
I’ve never been anywhere at all, either by land or water.
YouVe never been out of Tangier?
Never! Why would I? Where would I go? W ho would I go
with? I’ve got a feeling that if I should leave Tangier I’d never
come back. Never! No, I’d never come back.
Why not?
I don’t know.
I turned to face her, and her eyes opened very wide, as if she
were going to say: Isn’t that the right answer?
I could not go on looking at her, and I let my gaze drop. This
girl was beginning to worry me. I looked at the door instead.
Then she too turned towards the door, and said again: W hat are
you looking at?
I’m looking at the door.
134

FO R BREAD ALONE

Why? W hat’s wrong with it?
Nothing.
W hat are you thinking about? You’re thinking of something.
I’m thinking of the door, I said.
W hat’s the matter with the door?
I don’t like to be locked in.
We sat down. She had put two glasses and a botde of wine on
the taifor.
It used to bother me to have somebody turn the key on me,
but I’ve got used to it. She smiled.
I’m not used to it, I said. And I don’t want to get used to it,
either. I might as well be in jail.
I was thinking that in the face of that locked door we were
equally powerless, she and I. She’s Qaabil’s girl. And I’m his
cargador, but one he still doesn’t trust. The idea came to me to go
over and break down the door, but that would ruin everything:
my friendship with el Kebdani, my affair with Sallafa, and the
possibility of working for Qaabil and perhaps becoming as
trusted a cargador as el Kebdani.
W hat are you thinking about? That’s enough thinking! Open
the botde.
I picked up the corkscrew.
I’ve got something to say to you, she went on.
I looked at her. W hat’s that?
W hy don’t we leave Tangier? Run away together?
I looked harder at her. Where to ?
Ajiywhere. Casablanca, for instance.
135

MOHA MED CH OUK RI

I thought of saying: W hat about your hair and eyebrows?
But I was afraid of hurting her, so I said: And what would we do
there?
Anything. All sorts of things.
I opened the bottle.
I’m not a skilled worker in anything, I said. And what would
you do in a place like Casablanca?
I can do any kind of work, she declared.
I filled both glasses.
I could work as a maid with a French family, for instance. I
have a friend named Fadila. She went to Casablanca. And in no
time at all she found a job with a French family.
At this point I remembered what el Kebdani had told me
the night before about how Sallafa became whenever she was
separated from Bouchra. W hat about Bouchra? I asked her.
Oh, she’ll go with us too.
Is this girl out of her mind? I thought.
I see, I said brusquely.
She’s all right, objected Sallafa. W hat’s the matter with her?
Don’t you think she’s all right?
I stared at her.
I didn’t say anything against her. I just asked you.
You don’t know her yet, she told me. When you get to know
her, she’ll be just like your sister.
The way she is for you, I said to myself. I passed one of the
glasses to her. She took it, and then held it out to my lips for me
to drink from. At the same time, she directed the glass I held in
136

FOR BREAD ALONE

my hands to her own lips. We drank slowly, our arms hooked.
If I had broken down the door and gone out, I should not have
had the pleasure of this moment. Never before had I drunk in
this fashion with anyone. The expression in her half-closed eyes,
plus a slight movement which she made towards me, said clearly
that she wanted my lips. She began to give me, little by little, all
the wine that was in her mouth. That also was something I had
not experienced before. I am discovering all kinds of new things.
This time it was I who led her into the bedroom.
We were already back in the sala when I heard the key turn in
the lock. Farid el Atrache was singing: When willyou return, love
o f my soul? Sallafa had been sitting pensively, listening, neither
happy nor sad. I understand her only when she is laughing or
quarrelling. It had been good in bed, better than yesterday, or so
it seemed to me. Who knows what’s passing through her head at
this minute? Perhaps shes annoyed because I gave her no precise
answer when she made her suggestion that we run away together
to Casablanca. I watched el Kebdani come in, carrying a basket
of food from the market. He seemed tired and depressed.
Ah, Qaabil! You’re back? I cried. He stared at me, and I began
to stammer apologies.
I’m sorry. I was thinking of something else. W hat’s the
news?
The news is bad. Terrible!
W hat ? Kheir, inshaAllah!
He set the basket down in front of Sallafa.
Here. Qaabil says to fry all the fish.
137

MO HA MED C H OUK R I

She glared at him. Is this a time to be bringing back food for
lunch? she demanded.
We were busy setting up a job.
I don’t care what you were busy doing. One of you could have
brought the stuff back long ago.
Has something happened, or what? I asked el Kebdani.
It’s all clear now, he said. It was the Spaniards who engineered
the riots. They hired the mob and brought it in from outside.
Ah, so what they said about el Merouani at the Cafe Chato
was true, then.
Maybe. W ho knows? All we know is that the Spanish started
it.
I see! They used the anniversary as an excuse to start things,
and then they used the Moroccans as pawns.
It looks that way.
Thats very bad.
We know dozens of people were killed, and yet only six or
seven funeral processions have gone through the Zoco Chico on
the way to the mosque.
And all the other bodies ?
They must be hiding them so the public w ont see how many
there are. Most of the ones who were killed are from out of town.
That’s why it’s so easy for them to bury them in secret.
I thought for a moment. Then I said: Are they letting people
walk freely around the city?
Yes, but there are guards everywhere. It’ll probably go on like
this for several days. The soldiers are working hand-in-hand with
138

FOR BREAD ALONE

the police. They search anybody they think looks suspicious, and
take whoever they want to headquarters for a grilling.
Wheres Qaabil?
He went to his fathers house. Hasn’t Bouchra come back
yet?
Not yet, Sallafa said. W hy don’t you go and get her? She may
be afraid to come back alone, with all the police and soldiers in
the street. Go on, Kebdani, she coaxed.
I don’t know where her mother lives, he said.
In Dar el Baroud, near the Cafe Makina.
But I don’t know the house.
Ask anybody down there. There are always children playing
in the street. They all know her.
Wait a while. She’ll be along. I tell you there’s nobody in the
street to ask. In times like this nobody goes out unless he has to.
And as for children playing in the street, I didn’t catch sight of
one anywhere all morning.
Khlass! she cried. Come on! Life has suddenly changed? It’s
the end of the world? Just say you don’t want to go. That would
be enough.
That’s not true, he began.
Don’t try to talk!
After a moment she went on, but as if speaking to herself: I
know what I’m going to do. I swear, if you find me still around
here you can spit on me. You can piss on me!
Everything’s all set, he told me. Expect to work tonight.
There’ll be three other cargadores going with us, and we’ll be
139

MO HAME D C H OUK R I

using two cars, one to hold the stuff and the other for the men.
I’ll be bringing the stuff in from the ship in a rowboat. You’ll be
on the shore with the other three, and you’ll carry it up from the
beach to the car. You’ll need all your strength, because you’ve got
to move fast the whole time. And you’ll need your nerve. The
Customs men may be there on the shore somewhere, or stop us
at the edge of town. If that happens, you’re to do whatever either
Qaabil or his partner tells you. You’ll meet his partner. The secret
police could come up while you’re emptying the stuff out of the
car, once you get to town. I like to tell you right out. The job is
dangerous. It’s a job where anything can happen. They may shoot
at us. You understand that?
Yes. I understand.
Sometimes the leader is able to bribe them. But usually they
can’t get together on the amount, and that’s when the trouble
begins. That’s the point when things begin to get rough.
How rough?
I mean they shoot it out.
So Qaabil has a pistol, I thought. That’s something to know.
I must be very careful with Sallafa. W hat was there to stop him
from firing on us both if Re found us in bed together?
Has Qaabil got a gun? I asked him.
Ah! That’s none of your business. I’m just telling you what
may happen. It doesn’t matter one way or the other to you
and me whether Qaabil and his partner have guns or not. You
understand?
I was just asking.
140

FOR BREAD ALONE

it.

I tell you things I couldn’t tell any other cargador, he said.
I know. And thanks.
He turned and called out: W heres the sebsu Sallafa?
She was in the kitchen. I don’t know, she shouted. Look for

She’s getting even with him, I thought. I suddenly remembered
that we had smoked a little £z/while we had been in the bedroom;
nevertheless I pretended to look for the pipe along with him
there in the sala. Then he went into the bedroom and called out:
Here it is! I’ve found it!
I went and put on a record. It was Mohamed Abd el Wahab
singing ‘When Afternoon Comes’.

141

10

I

got into the car with the three other young cargadores and the
old man who was driving. I was the youngest. In spite of the
strong smell of wine that came from the driver, he drove carefully.
The speedometer never showed more than seventy kilometres an
hour, and on curves and inclines it dropped to forty or thirty.
We got to Cape Spartel about two in the morning, and drew up
behind a large black sedan that stood there.
The door of the other car opened, and a tall, powerful-looking
man got out. I guessed that he was about forty-five years old. He
came casually over to our car.
Hows the road? he asked the driver.
Fine. We didn’t see anybody.
We all got out, with the exception of the driver. From their
conversation I understood that they were referring to the
police and Customs men. And I realized that this tall man was
143

MOH AME D C HOUK R I

Qaabils partner.
Nows the time to be men, he told us. Then he put his hand
on my shoulder and looked intendy at me. W hat part of the Rif
are you from? he said.
Beni Chiker. My name is Choukri.
I know the Chikriyine. The Riffians are tough.
He removed his hand. I know the Riffians, he said again.
I was with them in the Civil War in Spain. I hope you’re a real
Riffian like the others.
I smiled.
He pulled out a pack of cigarettes and held it out to each of
us in turn. It s a good beginning, I thought. He looks like a good
man to deal with. Compared to him, Qaabil seems like a boy. He
too may be a good man, but you sense his weakness. Whereas it
would be easy to feel loyalty to this man.
Are you ready? he asked us, and we all said: Yes.
The path downward was hard to negotiate. We squeezed
between trees, crashed through bushes, and clambered over
boulders. Are we going to try to carry the stuff back up this same
path? I wondered.
Call me Kandoussi if you want to call me anything, said
Qaabil s partner.
I decided that this was probably not his real name. It might
be only his business name. The path went on being difficult.
Several times I stumbled into holes and scraped myself on the
sharp rocks.
You’ve got to be very careful not to fall once you’ve got the
144

FOR BREAD ALONE

stuff on your back, he said. W hat we’re carrying is fragile.
W hat could be in the cartons? I thought. Something
breakable. W hat could that be ?
When we reached the strip of beach at the bottom of the cliffs
he pulled a flashlight out of his pocket and began to make signals
with it in the direction of the water. The signals came back from
the darkness out there.
We found Qaabil sitting alone on the sand. Beside him lay
a pile of sacks and a coil of rope. Ah, you got here! he cried.
Everything ready?
Everything’s perfect so far, replied Kandoussi.
Soon we heard the sound of a motor. More messages flashed
from the water. Kandoussi sent back the same succession of
flashes. The sea was rough. The motor came nearer.
Get ready, said Kandoussi.
The sound of the motor stopped.
After a quarter of an hour of silence, there were more signals,
which Kandoussi answered.
The rowboat s on the way, he said. Get down to the edge of
the water.
Two of the cargadores took off their trousers and sandals. The
rowboat hove into view, rising and falling with the movement of
the waves. The two cargadores waded into the water and guided
the craft inward, one on each side of it. Kandoussi ran down to
the water, and they pulled the boat up onto the beach. There
were nine cartons. We began to carry them to a spot not far from
the edge of the water, where we stacked them on the sand. The
145

MO HAME D C HOUK R I

cartons were not as big and heavy as I had expected. Whatever
was in them must be very valuable. Watches, perhaps ? Rapidly
we emptied the boat.
Can you get back to the ship all right? Kandoussi was saying
to el Kebdani. Its not too rough?
Its all right.
If you think there’s any danger, we’ll leave the boat beached
here until the morning and take it back then.
No. I don’t think I’ll have any trouble.
Look out for those rocks.
I know, said el Kebdani. I know the whole place.
See you soon, I said to him.
Ah, Mohamed? B ’slemah. I’ll see you back at the shack in an
hour.
The two cargadores began to pull the rowboat back out
into the water, with el Kebdani plying the oars. I watched him
disappear into the darkness, riding up and down on the waves.
Working quickly, we put two cartons into each sack. When
we had tied up the openings, Kandoussi came up to me and said:
Can you carry two cartons, or is one enough for you?
I can carry three if you want, I said with great confidence.
Probably he doesn’t believe me. My body is very thin. But
I had my pride. I was thinking: This is better than begging or
stealing. And better too than letting an old man suck on me, or
selling harira and fried fish to the Djebala in the Zoco de Fuera.
Better than any of the work I’ve had. It’s an adventure, and I
feel like a man. In any case, I am seventeen. I feel on this early
146

FOR BREAD ALONE

morning that I am entering into a new phase of my life.
We loaded the sacks on our backs, and started up the same
path we had come down. Kandoussi went first, and Qaabil,
empty-handed, brought up the rear. Each one of us cargadores
was carrying a sack with two cartons in it. Kandoussi carried the
ninth carton, also wrapped in its sack.
It was not long before my load began to weigh more and more
heavily on me. The pain hit my spine and the nape of my neck.
I must have placed the sack in the wrong position when I took
it onto my back. But now I did not dare stop and shift it for fear
that Kandoussi would think I was tired, and we were still only
about halfway up the path. If I show signs of weakness now, very
likely he will not hire me the next time he needs a cargador. As
for Qaabil, at the moment he seems as unnecessary to the scene
as he is ineffective in his daily life. Should I even obey his orders
if he gives them? Then I wondered why I should be thinking such
things about him. Up to now he has treated me very well. I must
try and get rid of these feelings. I must fight against them, even
while my shoulders shoot pains in every direction and the bones
at the back of my neck go on cracking. I was breathing heavily
through my mouth, and my throat was getting dry. I suppose the
trouble came from having smoked too much Virginia tobacco
and kifi But Sallafa also had a part in my weakness. During the
past day I had made love with her four times. And here I was,
thinking of doing it again. Yes, Im going to make love with her.
There’s no doubt about that, if only everything goes well here
and I manage to get to the shack before Qaabil and el Kebdani.
147

MO HA MED CH OUK R I

But the key? Will Qaabil give it to me when weVe finished here,
if for instance he finds that for some reason he has to stay on
longer than he thought, or if he can’t get back until morning ?The
idea of getting into bed with Sallafa at this hour of the morning
excites me, and that helps me forget the pain of the load on my
shoulders and the burning shortness of breath. The money I was
going to get for this work meant nothing compared with what I
should find in the shack. Money was only for the world outside
the shack. I wish Sallafa were with us now, just walking ahead
of us without carrying anything. Am I myself beginning to fall
in love with her? Merely to think of her makes my heart beat
harder. Then I feel a wave of hostility towards her. I imagine
myself insulting her, slapping her, trying to work up her temper.
Maybe I like her better angry than calm, better sad than happy.
Maybe she means more to me when she is being crazy than when
she is sensible. I like the way she behaves when she is with Qaabil.
Yes, I like to watch her fight with him. I can imagine myself in
Qaabils place when she disappears, losing control like him and
waiting desperately for her return. Thus at this point I learn a
new truth about my feelings for Sallafa.
W hen we got up to the road, the two drivers were there, one
standing beside each car. They helped us pile the boxes into the
back seat of the first car. Kandoussi got into the front of that
car and Qaabil got in with us. We went ahead of Kandoussi,
whose car followed always at the same distance, about a hundred
metres behind. We drove so slowly that I decided this must have
been arranged beforehand, perhaps as a way of protecting the
148

FOR BREAD ALONE

merchandise. I doubt that any of the cargadores knew exactly
where we were going. During the entire ride no one spoke a
word. From time to time the cargador sitting to the right of me
coughed and sniffed violently. We took the road past the animal
cemetery by the river at Boubana. W hen we got to the crossroads
by the Spanish Cemetery both cars stopped, and Qaabil got out.
The driver of the other car came over.
Qaabil spoke to our driver. Take them wherever they want to
g°He handed me the key. Go to the shack, and don't open up
for anybody but el Kebdani.
The other driver got in and sat in Qaabil's seat. Then we drove
down the road towards Dradeb, leaving the other car still parked.
The operation had certainly been very carefully planned. I was sure
now that Kandoussi and Qaabil trusted absolutely no one. After
our car is gone they're going somewhere that only the two of them
know about, to unload the stuff. Qaabil must have another key,
otherwise he would have said something about my letting him in.
He may work all night and not come back before morning.
We got to the hill at Dradeb. The driver smelled even more
strongly of wine now than he had before. Where do you want to
go, brothers ? he asked.
Two of the cargadores wanted to be left in the Zoco de Fuera.
I asked him to take me to the Place de la Casbah.
I know where to take you, he told me.
The one who had been coughing beside me also wanted to go
to the Casbah. I looked at him, and he looked at me, but we said
149

MO HAME D CH OUK RI

nothing.
The two cargadores got down in the Zoco de Fuera, as two
policemen walked past. The car drove on through the arch of Bab
el Fahs. The streets were empty. Another pair of policemen stood
in front of an apartment house. My fear was that they might stop
us and ask to see our papers. It was then that I realized how much
colder the night was now than it had been earlier. We got out of
the car in the Place de la Casbah, the last cargador and I, leaving
the two drivers together.
I’m going down here towards Amrah, I said to the cargador.
And you?
Hecoughed. I’m going down thatway, too, to Ouedel Ahardan.
We passed under the arch and started down the hill. I did not dare
bring up the subject of the work we had just done. After a silence
he said: Is el Kebdani a friend of yours ?
Yes.
Hes a good man. This is the first time youve worked like
this?
Yes, its the first time.
And Qaabil, is he a friend of yours, too?
No, hes a friend of el Kebdanis. I met Qaabil through him.
Are you a friend of Qaabils?
No, I only know Kandoussi. Hes a man with a lot of guts.
And hes serious. He knows what hes doing. If he tells you hes
going to do something, he does it. All the cargadores want to
work for him.
I feel the same way, I told him. I noticed how he treated us.
150

FOR BREAD ALONE

When we got part of the way down the hill, I stood still and
pointed up the small street that led off to the left. Ym going up
here to Qaabil s shack, I said.
Yes, he said. So you live with Qaabil?
No. He just invited me to stay there. I haven’t got my own
place to sleep yet. El Kebdani introduced me to him. I told you.
I know. See you.
Bslemab!
I heard only my own footsteps in the dark, silent street. Then
there was a shrill scream from two cats nearby. One of them ran in
front of me, the other pursuing it. Hes after her, I thought. But she
wants to get away from him. I hoped Sallafa would not refuse me the
delight of being with her at this early hour. To make love early in the
morning before dawn! This will be the first time I shall have gone to
bed with a woman at the hour of thejjen A first experience.
I got to the shack, and stuck my ear to the door. Once again
I heard the yelling of the cats, but from a distance. I slid the key
carefully into the lock and opened the door.
There was a light in the bedroom. Is she still awake? I shut
the door and turned the key, locking it. Then I gave the key an
extra half-turn so that the door could not be unlocked from the
outside. I tiptoed into the bedroom. A half botde of wine sat on
the taifor, and beside it the sebsi and the box of kif. She is lying
on her right side with her knees drawn up. It s sad to see a girl
sleeping alone.
I went back into the sola and turned on the light. Two
blankets and two pillows had been tossed onto the couch. Now
151

MO HAME D C HO UK R I

I understood. A pillow and a blanket for me, and the same thing
for el Kebdani. I took off my jacket and trousers, remaining in
my underwear. There was a sound from the bedroom. W hen
I went in to look, she had changed her position. She was still
lying with her knees bent, but now she was facing in the other
direction. I sat down on the edge of the bed and put my hand on
her shoulder, hesitant to awaken her. It would be better to get
into the bed behind her, and then run my hands over her until
she wakes up and feels me there beside her. I climbed slowly into
the bed.
Then she said very clearly: Your feet are like ice. Get them
away from me.
W hat’s the matter? Are you angry with me?
She did not reply. My right hand began to touch her body
here and there. Its like an orchard, I thought. There are apples
and oranges up here, and pears and peaches back here. And here
between her thighs are persimmons. When my hand arrived
there, she pushed it away with force.
Don’t touch me, she said. Its the wrong time of the month.
Go to sleep.
You mean you’ve got blood? I said incredulously.
Yes. O f course I have. W hat do you think?
I remembered Monique in her bathroom, sitting on the bidet,
washing the blood from between her legs. So now Sallafa is the
way Monique was.
I understand, I said. How long does it last?
Oh, at least three days.
152

FOR BREAD ALONE

So the hope of making love early in the morning is gone, I
thought. I may have the chance again some time, and I may not.
W ho knows what will happen between us in the next few days?
My sex is standing alone in the region of the peaches. W hen it
tried to walk a little back and forth, she moved suddenly and
lay on her back, saying: Haven’t you iny shame at all? That’s
something I won’t do with you.
Just a little walk, that’s all.
W hat are you talking about? she cried. Are you crazy, or
what?
I’m going to follow this through to the end, I said to myself.
Why not ? I asked her.
Because that’s something you don’t do with women. It’s a sin.
Don’t you know that?
A sin?
O f course. A sin.
I lay on my back now, as she was doing, and looked at the
place where the blanket pointed upward, where my sex stood
alone. The pressure of the blanket hurt a little, and I arranged
it so it would lie back on my belly. How to make it rest? Its
stubborn. This was the first time I had been made aware of how
extremely stubborn it was. I took hold of her hand and held
it for a moment. Then I brought the hand up and placed it on
my sex. She said nothing. At the touch of her hand, the sex
grew even more eager. I waited for her to play with it as she had
done the first night. But her hand merely remained holding it
tightly. W hen I placed my hand over hers and pushed it back
153

MO HAME D CH OUK RI

and forth, she pulled away from me.
Leave me alone. C ant you just go to sleep? Her voice was
plaintive.
This time it was my own hand instead of hers that moved
back and forth. I started to give it a workout and a rubdown.
W hat are you doing?
W ithout looking at her I said: Just let me alone. IVe got to
satisfy it or it w ont ever lie down.
You’re going to get me filthy, she said. Go into the other room
and do whatever it is you want to do.
I got out of bed, imagining that I was about to seize Asiya
by the tank, and walked into the other room holding my sex in
my hand so it would not get cold. But I had to use both hands
to cover myself with the two blankets. I quickly gave it back the
warmth of my hand, so it would not weaken.
About nine o’clock in the morning we had breakfast together
in the sola. We did not speak. She looked pale, sad and dreamy.
I too felt tired and depressed as a result of the imaginary rape. Is
it not a kind of insanity to conjure up the image of a woman and
then proceed to rape her? And I do not even know whether the
girl is still living. It would have been better to have stayed there
in bed, warmed by Sallafas body, feeling her alive and moving
beside me. I could have touched her and smelled her. Asiya was
only a great void in my imagination, and I had worked myself
into a frenzy of excitement over this nothingness.
Neither el Kebdani nor Qaabil arrived. Could something
have happened to el Kebdani? It was normal enough for Qaabil
154

FOR BREAD ALONE

not to have appeared, but I was worried that el Kebdani might
have fallen into the hands of the Customs men. He is the best
friend I have found so far in this city.
Is it Sallafas bleeding that worries her now? I feel sorry for
women. Sometimes they get raped. Sometimes they have to
bear children. And blood runs from them for several days each
month. Perhaps she is thinking about Bouchra, who still has
not come back. It could be* El Kebdani was right about Sallafa
and Bouchra; Bouchra is the point where Sallafas strange
sadness begins. I wonder what will happen if Bouchra stays away
much longer. I am certain it is not Qaabil who preoccupies her
thoughts, and I feel a sudden surge of warmth towards her. It
would be good to ask her forgiveness, but I do not dare. I turned
and looked at her: she was totally immersed in her reverie. I liked
to see her in this sad state. Never before had I seen her give in to
her melancholy in this way. She has let something go inside her,
and now it is lost. Perhaps she is thinking that it is lost for ever,
or she may be trying to devise a way of getting it back. It would
be better to go out and leave her to herself. The world is sad and
decayed.
I stood up.
Im going out to see what it looks like in the town. I haven’t
seen it since the day of the trouble.
She glanced up at me for an instant, surprised. Then she
bowed her head, as if she could not bear to be separated from
her obsession. She remained staring into emptiness while I stood
there in front of her.
155

MO HAME D C HOUK R I

After a moment she raised her head and focused her eyes on
mine. Did Qaabil pay you for your work last night ? she asked me.
No. He hasn't paid me yet.
Wait a minute. She got up and went into the bedroom. Until
now I had not seen her behave in this serious, adult manner.
Today she looks like Bouchra. It was unusual for her to have
mentioned Qaabil s name and not have followed it up with an
insult. She will say of him: I know that pimp. I understand that
rotten mind.
Surely she has a surprise for me, I thought. W hat can it be?
As I waited I grew more impatient. She came out carrying three
watches in one hand and two hundred-peseta notes in the other.
I stared at the pretty blue foulard she had just wound around
her head. Now she looked like an ancient Egyptian queen whose
picture I had once cut out of a magazine. I went on looking at her
in astonishment.
Here. Take these things. Sell the watches and keep the money
you get for them. But don't mention it to anybody. And when
you sell the watches be sure Qaabil doesn't find out about it.
Smuggling's not regular work, and it doesn't go on long.
Her way of speaking amazed me. The words I meant to say
flew off before I could say them. I took the watches and the
banknotes, and stored them in various pockets of my jacket and
trousers. I looked at the key in the door, and said: Are you going
to lock the door from the inside?
Yes.
I opened the door and went out. After a few steps I turned
156

FOR BREAD ALONE

around. She was standing in the doorway sobbing and wiping
her eyes. I stopped walking. The feeling came over me that she
was saying goodbye to me. I would have sworn that she was
taking leave of me for the last time. I may never see her again.
The girl in Ain Ketiout, Asiya, Fatima, did I ever see any of
them again once they had gone? I started to walk again. It was
impossible to go back. My eyes filled with tears. I could not
stop them from forming. I was certain that she still stood in the
doorway watching me as I walked away. The force that keeps me
from turning around and going back must be the same force that
makes her remain standing in the doorway, unable to come after
me. I am leaving the shack for good. A part of my life is ending,
and another part will begin. Perhaps I shall never see any of them
from the shack again.

157

11

I

was sitting with Laila Bouwala in her room. Sometimes
Lalla Zehor, the proprietor of the house, served us herself.
Ever since I had left the shack, I had been spending my time
drinking. There is a continuous babble of girls’ voices coming up
from downstairs. During the past two nights I have slept with
three of the girls. The only one of those whom I like is Rachida,
who squirms in bed like a snake. Tonight here I am with Laila
Bouwala. Hamid Zailachi told me that sometimes she wets her
bed. He says it happened once when he was spending the night
with her. I’m going to stay in her bed all night and see if she does
it with me.
She poured what was left of the wine into the two glasses. Are
we going to have another bottle, or will this be enough?
W ithout reflecting, I said: We’ll order another. And another,
and another, until we’re drunk.
159

M OHAM ED CH OUK R I

She got up and went to the door. She pulled the curtain aside
and pushed the door, which was ajar. Then she called into the
corridor: Lalla Zehor! Agi! She let go of the curtain and turned
back to me.
W hats the matter with you? she said. You look sad. Has
something happened? Or don’t you like being with me?
I looked at her and smiled. I’m not sad. I’m just thinking of
something.
Thinking of what? She sat down smiling and lighted a
cigarette, which she then put between my lips. This made me
think of Sallafa. I studied Laila’s figure. It is fuller and better
than Sallafa’s. She has long, smooth black hair. I intend to spread
it over me like a blanket. I continued to run my eyes over her
body.
Why are you staring at me that way? Don’t you like the way I
look?
I told you I was thinking of something.
Well, stop thinking about it now. It makes you look sad.
Lalla Zehor spoke outside the door: Here I am.
Come in, Lalla Zehor, Laila told her.
She walked into the room, bringing a strong wave of perfume
with her. I’m here, she said.
Bring us another botde, said Laila.
I’m going to sleep here with Laila, I told Lalla Zehor. How
much is she?
Just give me sixty pesetas, and it’ll be all right, she said.
Nobody else would get her under a hundred.
160

FOR BREAD ALONE

I handed her the sixty pesetas, and twenty for the new bottle.
A girl was calling up the stairs: Lalla Zehor!
I’m coming, she answered. And turning to us: W hat a loud
voice that Rachida has! HI send the bottle up by her, or else by
Alioua Larossia.
There was the sound of footsteps, and then came two knocks
on the door.
W ho is it ? cried Lalla Zehor.
I recognized the voice. Its me. Can I come in?
Lalla Zehor raised the curtain, and Kandoussi walked in.
We’re in luck, Lalla Zehor cried. So its you? I feel better just
looking at you. Where have you been all this time? You haven’t
been back to see us in I don’t know how long.
I was surprised to see Kandoussi.
So this is where you’ve been hiding out, he said to me. I’ve
been looking everywhere, trying to find you. Come on. Get up.
But Si Kandoussi, aren’t you going to sit down with us?
Lalla Zehor was always hospitable. At least have something to
drink.
You’ll have to excuse me, he said. I can’t tonight. Some other
time, inshtL/lllah.
I stood up.
Will you be back? Lalla Zehor asked me.
O f course I’ll be back, I said immediately. Haven’t I already
paid you for the night with Laila?
If the door’s locked, just knock, she said.
Now Laila spoke up. W hat time are you coming back? I
161

M OHAM ED C H O UK RI

looked at Kandoussi, and he answered for me: He’ll be back
whenever he wants to come back. If he’s late, go to bed. But by
yourself, and not with some other client.
Laila smiled. Lalla Zehor said to Kandoussi: Don’t worry
about your friend. I haven’t got seven faces. Just the same face for
everyone.
Kandoussi and I went downstairs, leaving Lalla Zehor with
Laila. On the way down I asked him: Where’s el Kebdani?
This is not the place to talk, he said. I’ll tell you all about it
when we get outside.
Going through the alleys of Bencharqi we ran into a good
many drunks. From time to time Kandoussi stopped to shake
someone’s hand. He seemed to know great numbers of people,
and they all looked glad to see him and treated him with a special
respect. We said nothing to one another as we walked along. He
spoke when we got to the Zoco Chico.
W hat cafe do you want to sit in? The Fuentes? The Central?
The Espanola?
Wherever you like.
We went into the Cafe Central. Before we sat down we
ordered a cognac and a gin. We chose a free corner. Then he said:
But where have you been? I looked everywhere.
Here in Tangier. Where did you think?
I mean, where do you sleep?
I found a place in the Casbah, in Derb ben Abbou.
Is it the house next to the school?
Exactly. That’s it.
162

FOR BREAD ALONE

You re living in a nest of thieves and whores, you know.
But they asked for papers at all the other hotels. And I’ve got
nothing.
Fine. We’ll talk about that later, he said.
The waiter came up and poured our drinks for us. After he
had gone away, Kandoussi resumed talking.
Poor Kebdani. Hes dead.
My eyes and mouth opened wide. Dead? I repeated weakly.
Yes, he said. Hes dead. Allah irhamou. May Allah see to it
that we all die as Moslems.
I emptied my glass and called the waiter. Then I lit a cigarette.
Kandoussi drank what was in his glass.
Another round? the waiter asked.
Bring a full botde of cognac, I told him.
Right, said Kandoussi. Bring a bottle, and I’ll drink that.
But how did he die ? I said.
W hen he rowed back to the ship it wasn’t there. They’d caught
sight of a Customs boat coming their way, and had to get out. He
had to row ashore. The rowboat must have been thrown against
a rock. They found him and the pieces of the boat lying on the
beach. Poor Kebdani!
That was the death written for him, said Kandoussi.
Yes, I said sadly. You’re right. It was written that way. But it s
not right.
Poor Kebdani.
The waiter brought a botde of Terry and opened it at the
table. He filled the glasses, set the botde on the table, and went
163

M OHAM ED CH O UK RI

away.
The only things that can happen are those Allah decides must
happen, said Kandoussi.
And Qaabil?
He’s been arrested.
Arrested? For what?
They’re trying to connect him with Kebdanis accident. They
know Kebdani worked for him.
Did they take the ship? I asked him.
No. They stopped it and went aboard and searched it.
Then they let it go.
Where’s Qaabil now?
The secret police have him.
W hat has he told them?
So far he hasn’t admitted to anything.
I finished my glass and refilled it.
You’re going to be drunk fast if you go on like that, he said.
I could drink this whole bottle without moving it from my
lips, I bragged. And I put my hand on the botde. You want me to
show you?
Kandoussi also put his hand on the bottle. No! D ont be
crazy. I know you could drink it. Tell me: why did you leave the
key with Sallafa?
She asked me for it. Naturally I let her have it. She’s the one
who ran the shack.
I know that. But she’s run away.
Run away?
164

FOR BREAD ALONE

She took everything she could carry with her out of the place,
and disappeared.
Where to?
How should I know? Its a safe guess she’s left Tangier.
So she’s gone, I said to myself.
It always ends that way if you let a whore into your life, he
said.
And Bouchra? Hasn’t she come back yet?
She must have gone with Sallafa. They’ve never been separated,
not since they were kids down in Dar el Baroud.
They’ve gone together to Casablanca, I thought. I looked out
into the Zoco Chico, full of drunks wandering up and down, and
said: Well, things are back the way they were before the trouble.
Things aren’t good, though, anywhere in Morocco, said
Kandoussi. We’re going to see much bigger trouble than that
before too long. They’re going to be demanding independence.
El Kebdani told me that only six funeral processions went to
the mosque, and everybody knows that dozens were killed.
A lot of bodies are beginning to be washed up along the shore,
he said.
I see. They threw them into the ocean afterwards.
They say that even live people got thrown in, sewn up in
sacks. And some of the dead bodies had no bullets in them or any
marks on them. They found one boy on the beach at Larache,
with handcuffs still on his wrists. But no marks on his body
anywhere.
Very bad, I said.
165

M O H A M ED CH O U K R I

They’ll probably keep coming across bodies for a long time.
But you can never get to the bottom of all that. I have five hundred,
pesetas for you. Your wages for the work you did the other night.
I was going to pay you tonight, but I think tomorrow would be
better, now that I see how you are tonight.
Whenever, I said. It doesn’t matter.
I’m going to leave the money with Sidi Mustafa at the Cafe
Raqassa. He’s reliable. Do you know him?
Yes. I go there often.
He’s taking care of me, I thought. He doesn’t want me to
spend the money tonight.
I’ve got something else to say to you.
W hat’s that?
You’re not to tell anybody that you’ve worked for me. The
other three cargadores who worked with us are all reliable.
There’s nothing to worry about there. But you never know what
can happen. If they should arrest you and begin asking questions,
deny everything. They may beat you, but hold on, and don’t be
afraid of them.
Don’t worry about me.
There’s one good thing, at least. You’re not known as a
cargador.
Wouldn’t Qaabil tell them everything if they tortured him?
I don’t think he would. But who knows? They’ve certainly
tortured him by now.
Is the stuff in a safe place ? I asked him.
We delivered it to the Hindu the same morning.
166

FOR BREAD ALONE

I nodded my head. I see.
You’d better sleep at your hotel tonight. But look for another
place to stay. I’ll find you a place that w ont cost you more than
fifty pesetas a month.
W ho’s staying at the shack now ?
Nobody. Sallafa left the key at the baqal Qaabil always used.
That shack is no good to anybody now he’s in jail.
You mean the police are watching it?
They may be.
We got up. The bottle was still half full.
Would it be all right if I took it with me ? I asked him.
Take it. But be sure you don’t go back to see Laila.
Do you think I’m crazy? I’m tired. I’m going to sleep.
You’re still young, and Allah’s days are long, said Kandoussi.
I went outside to wait for him while he paid the waiter. He
came out. We shook hands.
Can you get to your hotel all right? he said.
O f course. You think I’m two years old?
Remember. Don’t go back to the whorehouse.
No. I told you, I’m not crazy.
I walked down the Calle del Comercio. In the alleys on each
side there were drunks and whores standing around. It was about
twelve o’clock, and I myself was drunk. I staggered along, feeling
well able to protect myself if anyone should attack me.
On my way up the steps at Djenane el Kaptane I came face to
face with a young man who was very drunk. There was no one
else in the street. He turned as I brushed past him.
167

M O H A M ED C H O U K R I

Where are you off to, handsome?
W hat do you care where Im going?
He put his hand on the botde I was carrying. Can’t we go and
drink this together?
Take your hand off the botde, I said. Get out of here.
I stepped aside and started ahead, but he blocked my way. I
live near here. In Derb Zeynana. Come on. We’ll stay together all
night.
W hat do you want of me? I cried angrily.
Why are you so skittish, gazelle? he murmured close to my
ear, trying at the same time to stroke my face.
Get out of here! I shouted. W hat do you want?
You still don’t know what I want of you? he said, leering. I
want you, that’s all. Come on. Spend the night with me.
I gripped the bottle by its neck. Go and spend the night with
your mother or your sister, I told him.
You’re talking about my mother, you litde markon ?he roared.
Insulting my mother? I’ll fix you!
I backed up a bit, and he followed. Then he kicked me in the
groin. I bent forward, clutching myself with both hands, while
stars of pain flashed in front of my eyes. He kicked me again
in the same spot. I fell and rolled down a few steps. The botde
smashed, but I went on holding the neck in my hand. He kicked
again, and I ducked so he would not hit my face. His foot hit my
hand instead. He went on kicking with both feet, furiously, while
I made every effort to see that he did not get my face.
A girl’s voice came from a nearby window: That’s enough! Leave
168

FOR BREAD ALONE

him alone! Don’t kick him like that. He’s younger than you.
I am trying to grab him by the leg. I duck one of his more
vicious kicks, and at that moment he loses his balance and falls
backwards onto the pavement. I made a great effort and got to
my feet. Then I kicked him in the face.
I heard the girl’s voice again. Stop it! You’re going to kill each
other!
He had his face covered. I went on kicking him. When I was
tired of kicking, I used the broken neck of the bottle on the two
hands that were spread over his face. He was bellowing like a
beast. My face! My neck!
I ran on and left him there yelling. The girl’s voice cried: That’s
what you wanted, you two. You’ve finally got it.
I fell several times as I ran up the stairs. Blood ran from my
face, my knees, and from the hand that had held the bottle. I
could still hear him bellowing as I went through the arch of Bab
el Assa. I took out my handkerchief and put it to my nose. Blood
was coming from my mouth as well.
At the entrance of Derb ben Abbou I stumbled on one of
the steps and fell, letting go of the handkerchief as well as the
broken neck of the bottle, which I still had in my hand. It took
my last remaining strength to get to the hotel door. The window
was open and the light was on. I called hoarsely: Zailachi! Come
down quick!
From the window above he leaned out. W ith him were Naima
and Faouziya.
Mohamed! W hat’s the matter?
169

M O HAM ED C H O U K R I

Come down.
A moment later the door opened, and he stood there barefoot
and with a knife in his hand. W hats happened?
I wiped the blood from my face with the sleeve of my jacket.
I got into a fight with a drunk, I sard. I think hes still after me.
BouChta leaned out of the window. W hat is it? he said. Fm
coming down.
Come down fast, you pimp, said Zailachi. Then he said to
me: Come on. Follow me. Was he by himself?
I spat out some blood. Yes. He was alone, the son of a whore.
Hurry up.
I slipped again in the street, trying to follow him. Where
the alley turned he slowed down. Then he stopped, and peered
cautiously around the corner. After that he began to run again,
and stopped only at the entrance to the Place de la Casbah.
Where was he?
On the stairs of Djenane el Kaptane, I said.
BouChta caught up with us. He too was barefoot, and he
carried a club.
We did not find him. The same girl was still in the window.
Hes gone, she said. And you go away too. Be sensible. Do you
want to wake up the whole neighbourhood?
She was right. Already a good many men and women were
leaning out of the windows and bending over the balcony railings,
to see what was going on. There was a pool of blood in the place
where I had left him. We followed the trail of blood down the
steps for several metres, until it suddenly ended.
170

FOR BREAD ALONE

Where’d he go? mused Zailachi.
Come on. Let s go back. Hes gone, I said.
Lucky for him he got away.
Going back up to the hotel I told them the whole story, .from
the moment he had blocked my passage to the point when I cut
him with the bottle and began to run. \
BouChta walked along beside us, saying nothing. I knew he
was the sort who would not even dare disturb a sitting hen, but
in spite of that, his presence made us feel better, more ready to
deal with whatever trouble might present itself.
Do you know that girl who was talking in the window?
Zailachi asked me.
No, I said. W ho is she?
Her name is Fatiha Cherifa. Her husband was a policeman
who got tuberculosis and tried to cure himself at home. He had a
friend who used to go and visit him, and it seems the friend used
to smoke £jfand get drunk with the policemans wife. Sometimes
the man with tuberculosis would take a chance and smoke and
drink with them, and half the time ended up vomiting blood.
I think he knew his wife was playing with the other man, but
he was patient. One night they drank more than usual, and the
friend began to pay attention to her right in front of him. He
went at the friend with a knife, but the friend pulled out his
pistol and shot him.
He stopped talking.
Did it kill him? I asked.
He died when he got to the hospital.
171

MOHAM ED C H O U K R I

W hat about her? W hat did they do to her?
W hat would they do? They questioned her and let her go.
BouChta spoke up. When women and love get mixed up, the
story is always dirty.
Shes got two baby girls, said Zailachi. The Missionaries
adopted her when she was little, and made a nurse out of her. She
speaks three foreign languages. But her greatest talent is right
between her legs, like all other women.
Naima Mesrara and Faouziya Achaqa were leaning out of the
window above our heads. Naima, open the door, said Zailachi.
Push on it. Its open.
There was talking and laughing inside. On the second and
third floors some of the roomers were still up and around. The
night-watchman came out of one of the second-floor rooms,
a cigarette hanging from his lips. He must have been having a
drink with the people who lived in that room.
Everything all right? he asked us.
Zailachi said: Yes.
We went upstairs, and he stood looking after us. Our room
had been a very large one. The proprietor had made three rooms
out of it by erecting partitions. It was my section where everyone
liked to gather at night. They sat there even when I was not at
home, because it was the only one of the three rooms that had a
window in it. The window looked out into the alley of Derb ben
Abbou.
Faouziya, go down to the kitchen and put some water on to
boil, said BouChta. At that moment Zailachi noticed the rip in
172

FOR BREAD ALONE

my trousers at the knee.
Come into the other room with me, he told me.
We went into his room. He took a pair of flannel trousers
from his bag and held them out to me. Wait until Faouziya comes
and washes your cuts, he said.
I told him to bring me a glass of cognac. He went back into
my room. The door into the corridor opened, and Faouziya came
in carrying the tea-ketde.
Here s the cognac, said Naima.
Take off your clothes to wash, Faouziya told me. Are you
afraid of us ?
I took my jacket and trousers off in front of them both, and
stood in my underwear. My left elbow was skinned and bleeding.
I let the two girls rub my wounds with hot water and cognac.
Zailachi was busy opening another botde of cognac. Suddenly
there was a loud knocking on the door. I started to get up to open
it. The girls had finished taking care of me.
Stay where you are, said Zailachi. He set down the bottle and
rose. The knocking went on, very loud.
W ho is it? said Zailachi.
A hoarse voice cried: Open the door!
Naima and Faouziya grew pale. The police! murmured Naima.
Only the police knock like that. They’re the only ones who ever
pound that way.
Hide the botde somewhere, said BouChta.
I was sitting on the couch. I reached out and took the botde. I
sat there holding it. Then I got up and looked out of the window.
173

M OHAMED C H O U K R I

Two policemen in uniform stood in front of the entrance door
downstairs.
Zailachi opened the door, and we saw two secret policemen
standing there.
W hat took you so long? Why didn't you open up? one of
them said. Well, say something.
He slapped Zailachi. The two came into the room. I still held
the botde in my hand.
Girls and liquor, is that it? Give me that bottle.
I handed it to him. He looked at it.
So you drink Terry, do you? Your papers.
I have no papers.
He turned to BouChta. And you?
BouChta took out his identity card and handed it to him.
The man glanced at it and slipped it into his pocket. Then he
turned to the two girls and said: Put on your djellabas. Quick!
The other one handcuffed Zailachi and me together.
We all went downstairs to the first floor, where we found three
young men and two girls with another secret policeman. Two
of the young men were handcuffed together, and the third had
them hanging from one hand. The officer shut the open handcuff
on BouChtas wrist. The four girls walked out first and the rest
of us followed. W hen we were outside, the police pointed in the
direction of the Place de la Casbah, saying: That way.
Two of the youths were whispering behind us. No talking!
yelled a policeman.
There were two jeeps in the Place de la Casbah. The girls got
174

FOR BREAD ALONE

into one, and we got into the other.
They’ve caught a lot of game this time, I thought.
We were sitting very close together in the jeep. When we got
to the Souq ez Zra, the other car continued down towards the
Zoco de Fuera. Ours stopped there at the Brigada Criminal.
There in an office they searched us one by one, taking away our
belts, shoestrings and money. All they left us was our cigarettes
and matches. One of the three other youths had a small knife in
his pocket.
W hats this supposed to be for? asked the policeman who was
searching him. No? All right, we’ll see about that later.
After they had taken down our names they turned us over to
a man with keys in his hand. Zailachi and I followed him down
a narrow corridor until he stopped in front of a door. As he was
opening it, one of the men who had brought us in the jeep came
up. He pushed us through a doorway into a room where a light
bulb hung down from the ceiling. Three other prisoners sat in
the room, but one of them was asleep. The policeman unfastened
the handcuffs, stepped outside, and slammed the door.
Everything they do here is part of the punishment, I thought.
My left wrist hurt a little, and I rubbed it. I looked at the door
that was reinforced with metal plates, and reflected that this door
was stronger than any of the doors that had shut me in before.
The doors are getting tighter. Here I am, finally, in a real prison.
Zailachi sat down on the floor with his arms on his knees. Sit
down, he said.
I sat beside him facing the two young men who were awake.
175

M OHAM ED C H O U K R I

The floor was cold as ice. Great spots of dampness covered the
walls and ceiling. In one corner of the room was a latrine hole
with a water tap directly above it. Whatever they give you here
they give in a way that makes it all a part of the punishment, I
thought. I glanced at the hole in the corner. The stench that came
up from it made me feel sick to my stomach. Zailachi brought
out a pack of cigarettes and passed it around. The one who was
sleeping sat bent over with his head resting on his folded arms.
Zailachi pointed in his direction. W hats the matter with
him? he asked the others.
Hes drunk.
Hes better off like that, in this cold, said Zailachi.
The two young men were shivering.
How long have you been in here ? Zailachi asked them.
The same one who had spoken before answered now. They
arrested us this afternoon. We were playing cards in the Cafe
Debbou.
The other one smoked silently, looked at the floor. He raised
his head only to take a long pull on his cigarette from time to
time. Then later, his head down, he would exhale, and the smoke
would look like someone’s breath on a cold morning.

176

12
y the time morning came, we were all shivering with the
cold. Each time one of us got up to use the latrine the others
crouched further forward, staring at the floor. And the smell
grew worse. The young man who had been asleep during the
night drank a great deal of water, the same as Zailachi and I. It
was the great thirst of the morning after drinking. Zailachi stood
up and began to do exercises. He was in a good mood.
Get up and do this if you want to get warm, he told me.
No, I said.
Each time he made a vigorous gesture the others glanced up.
I watched him during the entire time he did his gymnastics.
Get up! he said. W hats the matter with you? There’s nothing
better if you want to stop feeling the cold.
The cuts on my knee and my elbow hurt. They’ll begin to
bleed again if I start doing that.

B

177

MOHAMED C H O U K R I

He did not say any more. He was beginning to pant, and his
motions were growing slower. He walked over to the latrine hole
and spat into it. He turned on the water tap and washed his hands
and face, wetting his hair and smoothing it back. He squatted,
urinated, washed his sex, and then washed the hand that had
washed the sex. He drank a litde more water and came back to
sit in his place on the floor with his hands on his knees. Drops of
water ran from his chin and from the tips of his fingers. He bent his
head forward. Litde by little he began to breathe normally. Then
he raised his head towards me. We looked at each other smiling for
a moment, and then he burst out laughing. This made me laugh
too.
The sons of whores! he said. They caught us the way a cat
catches a mouse.
Where do you think theyve taken the girls? I said.
The Zoco Chico police station. Where else would they take
them?
Do you think it will be a morals charge ? I asked him.
I don’t believe so. We weren’t making any trouble. They found
us drinking with two whores, that’s all.
How many days do you think they’ll keep us here ?
Not later than Monday or Tuesday, he said. Todays Saturday.
After a pause he went on: You’re lucky. BouChta too. He’s just a
tailor.
I’m lucky? I cried, astonished.
Yes. You’ve never been convicted of anything. You’ve never
been in jail. But I have, and they may accuse me of a new robbery
178

FOR BREAD ALONE

or something.
I wonder why they didn’t put BouChta in here with us, I said.
They just didn’t happen to. I don’t think there’s any reason.
They’ll let him out too on Monday or Tuesday.
You think they’re going to let BouChta and me off that
easily?
You’ll see, he said.
And Naima and Faouziya? I said after a moment.
They’ll be out drinking and whoring again on Monday or
Tuesday. The worst that can happen to them is that they might
make them go into a whorehouse to work, where they can
give them a medical examination every week. Anyway, I think
BouChta and Faouziya will be getting married as soon as they get
out of here.
You mean he’s in love with her?
I don’t know. But he wants to live with her.
And you?
W hat do you mean, and me ?
I mean you and Naima, I said.
He put his forefinger to his temple and drew circles with it.
Are you out of your mind? She’s like every other whore I ever
knew. I didn’t come into this world to marry a whore.
I heard the sound of footsteps close by, outside the door.
We all turned in that direction. The little square window in the
middle of the door opened. Then the door swung inward rapidly,
making a great noise.
They do it that way to scare us, I thought. Even the way they
179

M OHAMED C H O UK K I

open the door is part of the punishment.
Two old men came in, one of them carrying a large tea-kettle
and a basket full of metal mugs to drink out of, and the other a
white canvas sack. They said good morning. Behind them in the
corridor stood two guards. They gave each of us a loaf of bread
and a mug of tea.
You’ve got fifteen minutes before they take out the mugs, said
one of the guards.
The two old men went out and the guards shut the door. The
little window remained open. Both the tea and the bread were
hot. We ate and drank without speaking.
Leave half your bread for the afternoon, Zailachi advised
me. They won’t bring anything around again until this time
tomorrow.
I nodded my head. After we had finished, Zailachi pulled out
a cigarette and passed it to the others. He and I shared a second
cigarette between us. I noticed that the two youths who had
been arrested in the Cafe Debbou left none of their bread for
later. The third one, like Zailachi and me, saved the greater part
of his. Always when I have drunk and smoked a great deal, the
following day thirst takes the place of appetite.
We continued to smoke in silence, sipping what was left of
the tea. My body had begun to glow with warmth. The little
window stayed open. It may be because of the window that we
remain so quiet. W hat would life be like, I wondered, if all of it
had to be spent sitting like this here in this room? We would all
have to exist only in our memories, acting out the parts we play
180

FOR BREAD ALONE

here until we were so bored by both them and the memories that
we came to rest in a silence like this one. We would disappear one
by one, until all of us were gone, and the unluckiest of us would
be the one who disappeared last. I prefer to be with people, even
though they may be my enemies. I would rather be shut up in a
place like this with others than be free and solitary. It would be
better to be the first rather than the last to disappear.
The door opened, and the old man who had brought the tea
came in. A guard stood behind him watching us. We finished off
the last drops quickly, and dropped the mugs into the old mans
basket, on top of those that were already there, and we thanked
him.
May Allah forgive you and us both, he said.
Some of us answered: Am in.
The violent sounds were no longer producing their effect. I had
become indifferent to them. W ith time I should not even notice
them, and perhaps not even notice the fact that I was shut into a
room. But I am still not used to solitude.
Zailachi took out a small pencil and set to work writing on
the wall.
W hat are you writing? I asked him.
I’m writing two lines of a poem by Abou el Qacem Chabbi.
He was from Tunis.
And what did he say?
Heres what he says:
181

MOHAM ED C H O U K R I

I f some day the people decide to live, fate must bend to that
desire
There will be no more night when the chains have broken.
Do you understand?
No, but its magnificent. W hat does it mean?
He’s talking about the desire to live.
And what does the desire to live mean?
It means that if a man or a country is enslaved and decides to
try and get free, Allah will help. He says: the dawn will respond
and the chains will break because men will make it happen.
I see.
Abou el Qacem Chabbi was a great poet, he said. The others
were listening attentively.
You’re lucky, I said to Zailachi.
Lucky? Me? He was surprised.
Yes. You’re lucky.
Why?
Because you know how to read and write.
So I can read and write, he said. W hat good is it? Here I am
in this room. W ho knows what they’re going to accuse me of?
Things I’ve done? Things I haven’t done?
He began again to write on the wall, asking me at the same
time as he formed the first letter: W hat’s this?
I don’t know.
It’s a lif he said. Then he made another letter. And this?
I don’t know. W hat is it?
182

FOR BREAD ALONE

Thats ba. And this ?
Tsa, I said.
How do you happen to know that one?
Because I’ve always heard people say: alif, el ba, et tsa. And I
repeated with him the reading of the three letters.
We can make words out of these three letters, like aboun,
baboun, bata, taba.
He stepped away from the wall. Some day I’ll teach you to
read and write, he said. You could learn easily.
Do you think it’s easy?
Why not? Aren’t you a man?
I asked him to repeat the verses by the Tunisian poet several
times, until I had learned them by heart.
During the afternoon the young man who had been asleep
the night before began to pace resdessly, from one end of the
room to the other. The rest of us sat quietly, watching him. At
one point he seized the piece of bread he had saved from the
morning, walked over to the latrine, and crumbled it in his
hands, dropping the pieces down the hole. I looked at Zailachi.
It’s his business, he whispered. Let him do what he likes with
the bread.
The other two glared angrily at the youth. It seemed to me
that if he made one more move, there might easily be a fight.
Why’d you throw the bread down the hole? one of them
demanded.
I can do what I want with my bread, he said, glowering.
But you threw away bread, en neama dAllah!
183

M O H A M ED C H O U K R I

I tell you I’m free! the other cried.
You’re a pile of shit!
I’m free to do as I like with my bread, and with myself, too!
Yes, but do it when you’re alone.
Suddenly the young man began to pound the wall with his
fists, and soon he was butting it with his head. After a few blows
he slid to the floor unconscious, his hands and forehead running
with blood. Zailachi rose and knocked loudly on the door. The
little window opened and a guard said: W hat is it?
Somebody hurt himself, Zailachi said. He came back and sat
down. That’s all we can do, he whispered.
The young man who had been objecting now said: That’s
what he gets for doing what he did.
The door opened and two secret policemen entered,
accompanied by the uniformed guard. W hat’s going on in here?
He crumbled up his bread and threw it down the latrine,
Zailachi said. And then he started to hit the wall.
And before that, what happened? asked the other secret
policeman.
Nothing.
You didn’t quarrel first?
Zailachi looked around at all of us.
No, he said. Ask him when he comes to.
One of the policemen walked over and examined the blood
stains on the wall. We’ll see later whether there wasn’t some sort
of trouble here before he began to hit himself, he said.
The youth lay quite still, with the blood coming out slowly
184

FOR BREAD ALONE

from his cuts. The men went out and shut the door, leaving the
window open.
A quarter of an hour later they came back, bringing two
attendants with a stretcher. They lifted the young man onto the
canvas and carried him out, still unconscious. There were puddles
and smears of blood where he had lain. Again the door shut and
the window remained open.
There must be something the matter with him, I said.
Let him do what he likes, said Zailachi. He s either an alcoholic
or he smokes too much kif.
The young man who had been critical added: Or Allah has
put a curse on him. Or his father has.
O f course, said the other. You get punished for whatever you
do.
We were silent. Our cigarettes had given out. The butts we
had thrown away were extremely short. I picked one up, however,
and smoked it.
We awoke Monday morning completely exhausted. The two
others merely sat, bent over, and Zailachi did not do his morning
exercises. In spite of the ugly grey pallor his dark skin had taken
on as a result of hunger, he seemed in better condition than the
rest of us. I felt only like vomiting, and I was certain that I should,
if anyone used the latrine. I thought of that noon I had spent
on the docks, when the idea of bread mixed with excrement first
flowered in my mind.
The guard threw open the door and called out my name. I
stood up, and found that I was dizzy and that my knees were
185

M O HAM ED CH O U K R I

trembling. I said goodbye, even though I had no idea whether
I was going to be let out or not. I went along with the guard,
and as I climbed the stairs my laceless shoes flapped. Being out
of that hateful cell was like being half-free. We went into a room
where a large camera was set up in the centre, with a chair in
front of it. The guard withdrew, and the photographer told me
to sit down. The room was heated. To remember the cell was like
remembering being shut into a refrigerator. The man came over
to me and arranged my pose. Then he went behind the camera
and told me to look into the lens. He took one full-face picture
and two profiles. This must be for their records, I thought. He
asked my name, and showed me how to push my fingers, one by
one, onto the ink-pad and make their marks on a piece of white
paper.
A secret policeman entered and began to speak in French and
Spanish with the photographer, who was a Moroccan. When the
work was finished, the photographer ran his eyes over the paper
and asked me if I knew how to sign it. I said no.
Most of them are like that, said the policeman.
O f course, the photographer said.
Next they asked me to push my thumb again into the inkpad, and make my sign with it at the bottom of the paper. I did
not dare ask them what was written on the paper, but I did tell
them that I had done nothing.
I have nothing to do with that, said the photographer. Now
go down and report to the guard who brought you up here.
Then the secret policeman, speaking in Spanish, asked me
186

FOR BREAD ALONE

what kind of work I did. I told him I had no work.
And so what do you live on, if you have no work?
I dont know. I just live. I do whatever work I can find,
wherever I find it.
I see, he said. Well, go on downstairs.
I left them talking together, and wpnt out, shuffling in my
open shoes. On the floor below I looked in vain for the guard. I
stood in the corridor, with the door into the street open before
me. I could see the people going past. Two men dressed in civilian
clothes entered and walked in front of me. Secret policemen, I
supposed. Zailachi was right when he said they would release me
on Monday or Tuesday. It looks as if it were going to be today. A
guard came out of an office.
Have you finished with the photographer? he asked me.
Yes.
Come with me. He took me into his office. There were two
other men inside, both dressed in civilian clothes. They had me
put my thumb-print on another sheet of paper covered with
words. I told them my name and they gave me back my money,
belt and shoelaces.
I wondered what they had written about me on this piece
of paper. They can write whatever they want, since I have no
idea what the ink marks mean. Nor do I dare ask them to bring
someone who will read it to me before I sign it.
Get out of here, said one of the secret policemen.
I turned and stepped out of the office, having completely
forgotten my fatigue and my nausea. As I went through the
187

M OHAM ED C H O U K R I

doorway I ran into a man wearing civilian clothing, and excused
myself. He shoved me violently aside, so that I hit the wall.
Look where you’re going, you halfwit! he said. He went on,
and I stooped to pick up one of my shoes, which had fallen off.
He must be a policeman. Only a policeman could behave like
that.
When I got into the street I put the laces into my shoes and
attached my belt to my trousers. It was a clear cold day with a
bright sun overhead, and I breathed deeply as I walked along.
I went into Harouchs restaurant in the Zoco de Fuera. He
sold bean soup. I was thinking about the money Kandoussi had
said he would leave for me with the owner of the Cafe Raqassa.
And I also was casting about in my head for an idea for some sort
of work. I must find a new way to live.

188

13

T

he alarm clock began to ring. I reached out into the darkness
and shut it off. Then I got up and turned on the light. It was
five o’clock. I could feel sleep still hanging there deliciously close,
just inside my eyes. The boat will come into port in an hour, I was
thinking. I glanced at Naima. She was sleeping quietly. I hate to
live with a girl who never works. All she ever has to do is open her
legs, to me or someone else. Does she expect me to marry her, the
way BouChta did Faouziya? I haven’t gone that crazy yet.
I dressed rapidly, picked up the market basket, and snapped
off the light. Then I went softly out of the room. Downstairs I
washed my face in water that was like melted snow. I was careful
when I woke the night-watchman. He began to pummel the air
with his fists, as he always did when anyone woke him, and then
he stared wildly at me, saying nothing.
Abdeslam! I said. It’s Choukri. I want to go out.
189

M O HAM ED C H O U K R I

He gave a great sigh and got wearily out of bed. I followed him
to the front door of the hotel. As I went out, he said: May Allah
be kind to you this morning. I nodded at him and went down
the silent alley. The day was violet-coloured now. The signs of
poverty, blotted out by night, were becoming visible once again.
The lucky ones are at home in bed at this hour. They don’t get
up to work. They lie there, comfortable as excrement enfolded
in the belly. There are many things for them to rely upon: Allah,
their own personalities, love, power. But I can rely only upon my
own health and the fact that I am young.
I stopped just inside Bab el Assa and looked out over the
harbour. I could see that the water was rough.
W hen I got down to the waterfront I found Boussouf standing
by a kiosk having a bowl of bean soup. I said hello, and ordered a
bowl for myself. Between us we arranged the price. He would do
the work for me for 3,000 francs.
I heard yesterday that the steerage is going to be full of Jews
on their way to Palestine, said Boussouf.
I’m more interested in the French and Senegalese soldiers on
their way to Algeria, I told him. They don’t bargain so much. But
Jews! Most of them are businessmen themselves. Even the ones
who aren’t know just how much everything is worth.
But they’re leaving Morocco for good, and they’ll be sure to
want souvenirs from the last port of call.
We’ll see.
We walked out onto the breakwater and got into the rowboat.
He began to row slowly. Watching the oars cut the water put me
190

FOR BREAD ALONE

in mind of the time when I had been working in the vineyard
at Oran with the old m an,! ploughing the earth, he yelling and
scolding. Come on! Watch where you’re going! To the left, you
good-for-nothing RifEan! Come on! You re still half asleep! I’m
going to get Monsieur Segundi to put you in the kitchen peeling
potatoes. H it the mule harder! That’s all\you’re good for, peeling
potatoes and washing dishes.
It was at this hour that we used to go out into the vineyards to
work. The old man complained without stopping, and the sound
of his voice made my hands tighten on the reins. If it had not
-been for my attack on the beautiful boy in the field, I should still
be there working. I remembered my mother’s face, my aunts face.
I now understand why my aunt treated me with such tenderness.
She had no children of her own. And I believe it was her husband
who made her send me home in order to avoid possible trouble.
Look! said Boussouf. The ships coming into the harbour.
I’m looking, I said.
He stopped rowing, pulled one oar out of the water, and
dropped the oarlock into a hole beside the plank where I sat. We
began to row together.
The ship’s full of soldiers, he said.
As we drew near the side of the ship a Frenchman in uniform
called down to us: HHQuest-ce que tu as la-dedans?
I signalled to him to wait a minute. Boussouf pulled out the
coil of rope and got it ready to throw.
Catch it! I shouted.
Several hands reached out to grab the end of the rope, which
191

MOHAM ED C H O U K R I

was weighted with knots. Boussouf tossed up the coil with force,
and a black soldier caught it.
Tie it tight! I called to him in French.
Come on. Climb up! cried several soldiers.
I started to climb up the rope, hand over hand.
That’s right! Keep it up! Bravo! Good! shouted the voices.
A Senegalese soldier helped me onto the deck. Boussouf had
tied the basket onto the tail end of the rope once I was aboard.
I leaned over the railing and began to pull it up. Another black
soldier approached me and said: W hat have you got for sale,
brother?
W ithout turning my head towards him I answered: Swiss
watches, shawls, Japanese handkerchiefs and cigarette-lighters.
It was a French soldier who helped me get the basket over
the railing and onto the deck. Allez! Laisse voir ce que tu as ladedans.
I took out the carton of watches, leaving everything else in
the basket. Here are the watches, I told them.
How much is this one?
Five thousand francs.
It’s not a fake?
W hat do you mean? I don’t sell fake watches.
Three thousand.
Four thousand, I said.
No, no! I’ll give you three thousand.
Take it. It’s yours. I was thinking: If one of them buys
something, they’ll all begin.
192

FOR BREAD ALONE

The watches were disappearing from my hands one after the
other, and my pockets were filling up with banknotes. Suddenly
a soldier appeared and planted himself in front of me. Give me
back my money, he said.
If I do that, I thought, they’ll all start asking for their money
back. I can’t.
\
Why? I asked him.
They say your watches are no good.
Listen, I told him. Whoever told you that didn’t have enough
money to buy a watch, that’s all.
Are you going to give me back my money?
You picked out the watch yourself. Nobody made you buy it.
Dozens of pairs of eyes were staring doubtfully at me. I heard
throats being cleared. The blond French soldier spoke: Mine’s all
right. I’m going to keep mine.
I went quietly down to the steerage deck where the Jews were
travelling. It smelled of mildew and vomit.
W hat have you got, boy? asked a Jewish woman in a tired
voice.
Japanese shawls and handkerchiefs, I told her.
Several other women gathered around me. Let’s see what
you’ve got in your basket, the first one said.
W hat a pretty colour that one is! a girl exclaimed to a woman
who was probably her mother. How much is this?
A thousand francs.
Seven hundred.
I was thinking: I’ve got to sell everything fast and get out of
193

M OHAM ED C H O U K R I

here.
A pot-bellied old man with a pointed grey beard suddenly
cried: Its cheap material! Wash it once and the whole thing is
gone. No more colour.
The woman beside him turned to him. W hat do you know
about it? she cried. These things are for women.
I know the stuff, the old man said. The Hindus sell it wholesale
all over Tangier.
Its always hard to sell to old people, I kept telling myself. They
always pride themselves on knowing everything.
The Jewish women around me went on buying, without
paying any more attention to the old man. From time to time he
cried at them: You’re crazy! You’re buying the worst quality! The
lowest!
The shawls and scarves were disappearing, but the sharp smell
of the vomit was still there in my nostrils. There was a sudden jolt
and the boat stopped moving. I pocketed the money for the last
handkerchief and began working my way through the shouting
women. Bring more stuff! they were crying.
As I came up on deck a Senegalese soldier some distance away
caught sight of me and began to call out: Hey, you! Wait for me
there!
He probably wants me to take back the watch I sold him, I
thought. I hurried through the crowd to the other end of the
deck.
There was a circle of soldiers around Rami. That drunken
brute, who practically never gets out of his bed, must be selling
194

FOR BREAD ALONE

them watches for half the price I charged. I went over to him.
You’re the same old pimp, aren’t you? I said.
W ho do you think you’re talking to?
You. W ho did you think I was talking to?
Wait till we’re in town. I’ll show you, he said.
I’ll spit up your ass-hole, I told him.
I could see Boussouf rowing rapidly towards the ship. I waited
until he was below, and tossed the basket into the rowboat. Then
I began to climb down the rope, letting myself slide as I went.
The rope took the skin off the palms of my hands. As I went, the
taut end of the rope above me was suddenly cut, and I fell the rest
of the way, landing in the middle of the rowboat.
Pftu! cried Boussouf. This is no way to earn money. You want
to break the boat?
That Senegalese son of a whore must have cut the rope, I
said.
To hell with this fucking work, he went on angrily.
Row hard, I told him. They may throw things at us. It wouldn’t
be the first time. I know those soldiers, the sons of whores!
Look out! shouted Boussouf. He and I both ducked as a beer
bottle came down at us.
Take one of the floorboards and ward them off, he told me.
I did what he suggested.
The black man was screaming insults after us, and squeezing
an invisible neck between his two hands. It was as if I could feel
him strangling me. Then two bottles came at once, and I parried
them with the floorboard.
195

MOHAM ED C H O U K R I

O w ! My hand! Inaal dinhoum! I threw the board far from the
rowboat, and began to lick and suck my wound. It was a wound
that pleased me. Not for a long time had I so enjoyed watching
my blood run out. And the mixture of salt and sweet is pleasant
in my mouth. But I began to feel painful pricklings in the spot
on my hip where I had landed. Boussouf stopped rowing. We
were far enough away from the ship now. He stood up, seized his
crotch, and waved it wildly at those standing by the rail.
W hat’s that for? I said. W ho’s interested in what you’re doing
now? The currents against us.
We began to row together.
After a moment he said: But what did you do to them?
Nothing. It’s all Rami’s fault.
And what did he do ?
He always sells his watches at half price. The next time I see
him in town I’m going to piss on him.
You didn’t talk about the war in Algeria?
O f course not. Are you crazy?
And with the Jews?
No, no. Nothing. W hat would I tell them? Should I tell the
French and Senegalese soldiers not to go to Algeria and fight ? Or
tell the Jews not to emigrate to Palestine?
The tide and the current were very strong, and the wind was
coming up. Suddenly Boussouf s oar cracked in half. Only the
handle remained.
Now we’re in trouble, I said.
Pfu! All this for your three thousand francs! he cried.
196

FOR BREAD ALONE

Its not my fault.
The waves had begun to spill into the boat.
Listen, I said. You take care of bailing it out. Til tie the other
oar at the stern and try to steer.
The current is taking us towards El Menar. We’ll hit the rocks
there unless we’re lucky.
We’ll take care of that when we get near the shore, I said.
My whole life depends on this boat, Boussouf declared.
The current’s not going to take us any farther than Villa
Harris, I told him.
You’re trying to tell me what the current will do around here ?
You don’t know anything about it. But tell me this. How much
are you going to pay me if my boat gets smashed up ?
We’ll try not to let that happen, I said.
I want to know now. How much are you going to give me ?
I’ll give you twice as much as we agreed on.
What? Six thousand francs?
That’s right.
And for six thousand francs The boat tipped violently, and he fell over backwards. Quickly
I brought the oar-handle down on his left shoulder, and then on
his right one.
You damned coward! he roared.
Shut up, or I’ll throw you in.
You’ll see later.
I cupped my groin in my hand and shook the mass at him.
You’ll suck this for me! I cried.
197

M OHAM ED C H O U K R I

He lay back on the seat-board of the prow, without trying to
get up again. I busied myself taking off my belt, and started to
attach it to the oarlock at the stern. At that moment he came at
me with the oar-handle. I ducked, and the oar slipped out of his
hands onto the floor of the boat. We grappled, and I kneed him
in the groin. Then I pushed him backwards.
I grabbed the oar-handle, and he began to yell: No! No! His
eyes looked as though they would pop out of his head, and his
face had turned very pale.
Sit still, or you go into the water, I told him.
The oar I had been trying to fix to the stern was now floating
far behind us. Keeping the oar-handle in one hand, I began to
scoop out the water with an oil can. The boat was turning round
and round as it went along on the current. After a moment I
tossed the can at him.
It s your turn now.
He took the can and set to work silently bailing out the water.
I thought of Naima. Perhaps she is still asleep. She’s up there
dreaming while I’m here fighting with this bear. I don’t know
why I keep her with me. It s not love, that’s certain. It may be just
habit. Perhaps its merely her indifference. She has no blisters on
her palms, no beer botde has hit her hand, she does not know the
sweet salt taste of her blood in her mouth. When she wakes up
she will wash and go downstairs in her nightgown to talk with
the night-watchman or the proprietor. If one of the clients of the
hotel invites her into his room I think she is not likely to refuse.
She once said: The only excuse for love is marriage. I replied:
198

FOR BREAD ALONE

I’m afraid marriage would mean the end of love. W hat keeps us
together is the fact that neither of us belongs completely to the
other. Thus there is always that element of uncertainty between
us.
We were drifting nearer to the beach at Villa Harris. The waves
rise and crash before rolling onto the shore. The water is full of
sand. Fishermen have often assured me that sharks never go near
cloudy water. We got ready to jump out. I was the first overboard.
I swam underwater for as long as I could hold my breath. Then I
raised my head above the water and turned. Boussouf was coming
close behind me. The waves would raise me very high, and then
let me drop straight down, into what seemed like an abyss. Im
carrying my death on my shoulders now, I thought. Once I had
gone to visit my friend Manolo in the hospital, and he had cried
out: Oh, my God! Take me out of this suffering! He had tried to
commit suicide, because he had a fatal disease of the lungs. But
the nuns in the hospital had managed to keep him alive.
I swallowed some water, and for an instant began to dogpaddle, as if I were swimming in a well. I got my breath back, and
explored the bottom to see how deep it was. My feet touched
the sand, and I stood up. A wave pounded over me. I swallowed
more water. Then I ran up onto the beach.
Stand up! I yelled to Boussouf. Its shallow! I did not know
whether he had heard me or not. He kept swimming until he had
landed on the beach. The boat was grounded a good way down
the shore.
Boussouf stood up, looked first at the boat and then at me,
199

MOHAM ED C H O U K R I

frowning. He’s looking at me now as if I were a lamb he was
getting ready to roast. If I let myself be afraid of him, it’ll be the
end of me. If he beats me up he’ll take everything I’ve got on me.
He’ll go off and leave me here naked.
He came nearer, and I backed up. Let’s go and see how the
boat is, I said.
He began to walk along the beach, a few steps ahead of me.
The boat was touching the sand and moving with the waves. We
worked a while trying to pull it further up onto the sand. It was
hard work.
W hen we had finished, he stood looking down at it. There
must be some broken places, he said.
Where ? I don’t see any.
I know! he cried. I know my boat!
W hat’s the matter now? I said.
This is going to cost you ten thousand francs!
Why should it cost ten thousand francs?
Are you going to pay me or not?
No, I’m not. I told you I’d give you six thousand.
All right!
His fist hit the left side of my face, and bright lights exploded
in my eyes. I backed up a few steps so as not to fall. Then he
attacked like a bull. If I let him get hold of me, he’s going to break
my ribs, I thought, jumping out of his way, so that his attack
ended in a clumsy swinging at the air. It had suddenly begun to
rain, and it rained harder each second.
Come here, you son of a whore! he bellowed. Do you think
200

FOR BREAD ALONE

you’re going to catch me off my guard now? Like you did in the
boat? Come on!
I kept ducking his lunges, and he continued to follow me
along, shouting and gesticulating. I mustn’t waste my energy, I
thought. I’ve got to let him be the one to do the attacking.
He had begun to laugh and make gestures to entice me nearer
to him, so that we would fight hand to hand. You’re a coward! he
yelled. But who’s going to help you now ?
I did not answer.
Suddenly he sprang forward and grabbed my hips. I seized
his neck between my hands. Then I brought my right knee fast
up to his face. He raised his head. I began to pummel his face.
Suddenly he yelled and bent down. Then he fell over, holding
his foot with both hands. The blood ran not only from his nose,
but also from the under part of his foot. Then I saw something
that glistened. It was a broken bottle buried in the sand, like an
artichoke. The cut was very deep. I have no idea why it made me
happy to see the blood being absorbed by the sand in the pouring
rain. It made me feel that the rain itself was the sky bleeding. I
thought of the sheep whose throat they had cut, back in the Rif,
when they had filled a bowl with its blood and made my mother
drink it. I counted out 6,000 francs in wet bills, folded them, and
tossed them onto the sand beside Boussouf. Then I turned and
walked away. Behind me I heard him crying: Come back here,
you son of a whore! Come back here and I’ll spit up your ass!
As I got to the highway, I saw the bus from El Menar coming.
I began to wave, and it stopped. The rear door opened. I got in
201

M OH A M ED C H O U K R I

and handed a wet 1,000-franc bill to the conductor.
W hats the matter? he said. W hat happened to you?
No. Everything’s all right, I said.
The passengers turned to stare at me as I went forward along
the aisle. There were only seven or eight of them. I looked out of
the window towards the beach. There he is, only now limping
towards the rowboat.
After I got off the bus in the Zoco de Fuera I noticed many
people staring at me. Two women walking under one tiny
umbrella behind me were discussing me. One turned to the
other. That poor boy, she said. And the other replied: Yes. W hat
do you suppose could have happened to him?
They don’t know anything, I thought. All they know is how
to be sorry for people and say hard luck.
At the hotel I found the watchman in the sola, joking with
the cleaning woman as she scrubbed the floor. She dropped her
rag, and they both turned to ask me what had happened to me.
I’m all right, I said, and I went upstairs. The door of my
room was open. My things were not in their regular places. The
whore who’s the daughter of a whore has played a good hand.
Everything of any value is gone: my transistor, my alarm clock,
five wrist-watches and a dozen cigarette-lighters.
I went downstairs to the sala. You didn’t see Naima when she
went out, did you? I asked.
No. Why, is something wrong?
No, nothing, I said. But I think she’s gone for good, and
without telling me goodbye.
202

FOR BREAD ALONE

But nothing happened?
I shook my head. Nothings happened. Then I went back
upstairs to change my clothes. At least she left my clothes
behind. Now she’ll probably begin a new life with another lover
somewhere, just as she did with Hamid Zailachi and others long
before that. Only a filthy whore like her could have done this.
And yet, maybe it is just as well. Now I am forced to find a new
pattern in my life, this one being finished.
That afternoon I went to the Cafe Moh. I had an Egyptian
movie magazine with me, full of photographs of Arab actors
and singers. I was in the habit of buying three or four of these
publications each week, to look at the pictures of film stars
wearing Oriental costumes. Sometimes I masturbated in front
of the sexier dancing girls. Hamid Zailachi’s brother Abdelmalek
would read me the captions when he felt in the mood. He had
left his studies in Tetuan and come to Tangier, where he did
nothing but smoke kif, eat majoun, drink wine, and look for
whores and occasional boys. All the other men I knew in the
cafe were illiterate. One of them could write his name, but
with great difficulty. We all considered Abdelmalek the most
important habitue of the cafe. He reads the Arabic periodicals
to us in a strong, clear voice. If an article deals with the politics
of an Arab country, the owner of the cafe shuts off the radio, and
everyone listens intently. Sometimes he would stand up, lay aside
the magazine or newspaper, and launch into a speech, merely to
show off his learning. I noticed that he constandy quoted the
Koran and the Hadith. Often one of us would interrupt him
203

MOHAM ED C H O U K R I

and ask for a clearer explanation. These were occasions for him
to hold his knowledge over our heads, and he would make his
explanation still more obscure. While he spoke, someone would
hand him a pipe of k if He would stop talking for a moment while
he smoked, reach down to the table from where he stood and take
a few sips of tea, and then continue from where he had left off.
When he finished speaking, most of the men would congratulate
him on his performance, and the owner of the cafe would hand
him another glass of tea and some bread and butter. Some nights
I invited him to eat with me in one of the restaurants. Afterwards
we would go to a bar in the Zoco Chico to get drunk, or go and
spend the night together with two whores in a brothel. I was very
proud to appear in public with him.
That afternoon he was sitting with Grida, Mesari, and old
Afiouna, who supplied the k ifand majoun to the cafe. I asked for
a glass of black coffee and bought five pesetas’ worth of k if from
Afiouna. They were discussing King Farouk, Mohamed Neguib,
and the actions of Gamal Abd el Nasser in the July Twenty-Third
Revolution. I was interested. I smoked a pipe of k if and filled
another which I offered to Grida. He refused it. I held it out to
Abdelmalek. He did not take it either.
Put your k if away, he told me. We’ve got plenty of our own.
We want to talk quietly now, without being interrupted,
Mesari added.
I saw that they were excluding me from their company. The
qahouaji set a glass of coffee on the table. I asked Afiouna to sell
204

FOR BREAD ALONE

me two pieces of majoun> which I ate as I sipped the hot coffee.
Kemal the Turk came through the door, drunk. I tried to
get him to sit with me, but he refused. Then he leaned over and
whispered in French into my ear: IVe got half a bottle of whisky.
Im going up onto the roof. Do you want a drink?
You go up first, so Moh w ont notice.
I continued to sip my coffee for a while after he had gone on.
Then, taking the glass of coffee and the pipe with me, I climbed
the stairs. I found him drinking out of the bottle.
Ah! Fill the sebsi for me, he said. I handed him the pipe and
the k if so he could fill it himself. In return he gave me his bottle,
and I took two swallows.
How are things? I asked him.
Tm still waiting for my family to send me the money to go
back to Istanbul. He filled the pipe and handed it to me. I passed
the bottle back to him. We went on drinking, smoking, and
discussing our troubles, until all the whisky was gone.
W hat are you doing tonight? I asked him.
Nothing.
He hid the botde under his jacket, and we went back
downstairs. Abdelmalek was standing as usual, lecturing on
the afternoon news broadcast in Arabic from London, which
had just finished. My magazine was still lying on the table. I sat
down and asked Kemal to have something with me. He excused
himself, saying that he had an appointment with Mahmoud the
Egyptian at the Cafe Dar Debbagh.
Hes going to lend me some money, he said.
205

M OHAM ED C H O U K R I

Moh came up to us suddenly, remarking: I don’t like drunks
in this place. Kemal, not understanding Arabic, answered: Es
salaam, Monsieur Moh.
I burst out laughing. Kemal signalled goodbye and went out.
Abdelmalek glared at me angrily and sat down.
Go on, go on, Si Abdelmalek, urged Afiouna.
How do you expect me to go on with that kid laughing?
I’m not a kid, I told him. And you talk about Mohamed
Neguib and Gamal Abd el Nasser as if you had a conference with
them every day. Where do you get all that stuff about them?
Shut up! Illiterate! he roared, beside himself. You want to talk
about politics, you, when you can’t even write your name?
Mesari was trying to get Abdelmalek’s attention. Don’t listen
to him, he told him. He’s drunk.
It seemed to me that this was a good opportunity to get in
a blow at Abdelmalek and his group of friends. They wouldn’t
smoke with me, I thought, and I began to cast about for the
words that would most annoy him. I could think of nothing to
say. My mind was heavy with kif, majoun, and whisky. I’ll have
to ask him to go outside with me and fight. It’s the easiest way. It
involves no thinking of any kind.
I’m illiterate and ignorant, I said. But you’re a liar. I’d rather
be what I am than a liar like you.
Ah, get back to your pimping, he told me.
If you have a sexy sister, send her around. I’ll find her
somebody, I said.
No arguments in this cafe, Moh cried angrily, looking at me.
206

FOR BREAD ALONE

Why do you say it just to me ? I asked him. Because he’s a great
professor and I’m only a stupid lout?
Come on, that’s enough, said Grida. Get together and cheat
the devil.
But the devil is people, I told him.
Then I turned to Abdelmalek. Listen, Zailachi. Come outside
and I’ll show you who the illiterate pimp is.
He jumped up and ran towards me. The three of them, Grida,
Mesari and Afiouna, blocked his way, but he shoved them aside.
I got up, holding my glass in my hand, and dashed the coffee into
his face. He put his hands over his eyes. Someone grabbed me
from behind.
Outside, Zailachi! I cried. The man behind me let me go.
Be sensible, Grida told me. This is no way to behave to
somebody like him.
W ho does he think he is here ? He’s just a student who couldn’t
stay in school, and now hes come to Tangier to live like a tramp.
I saw Mesari and someone else going up to the roof with
Abdelmalek. I walked back to my table, and Afiouna sat down
with me. He filled the sebsi, lit it, and handed it to me, saying:
Here. Take it and smoke. It’ll make you feel calmer.
I’m not drunk, and I’m not mhashish, I told him. This isn’t
the first time I’ve had alcohol or majoun.
Then Grida went upstairs.
Nobody said you were drunk or kiffed, Afiouna said.
They think I am.
We all drink and smoke kif, he said.
207

M OHAM ED C H O U K R I

I smoked the pipe and coughed a litde. Afiouna got up and
brought his glass of tea from the table where they had been
sitting. I took a sip from it, and stopped coughing.
I’ve won the argument, I thought to myself. The other men
in the cafe were discussing the altercation, and I noticed that
certain of them agreed with me. They must already have felt the
same way I did about Abdelmalek.
Grida came down the stairs, followed a moment later by
Abdelmalek, Mesari, and his friend. Abdelmalek had washed the
coffee from his face and clothes. Grida came over to me. You’ve
got to make peace between you, he told me.
Yes, said Afiouna. Get up and talk to him. Were all friends
here.
They insisted, and I rose. Mesari and his friend pushed
Abdelmalek towards us, and we embraced. I turned to go back
to my table, but they made me sit down with them.
Come on, Si Moh, give us something to drink, said Grida.
Kemal came staggering back into the cafe. He had a black
eye.
Kemal! I said. W hat happened to you?
Moh stared at him with annoyance.
I got up and went over to him.
There were two of them, he said. They jumped on me. At a
whorehouse in Bencharqi.
Why?
They took me for a Christian. They wouldn’t believe I was
a Moslem. They said how could I be a Moslem if I didn’t speak
208

FOR BREAD ALONE

Arabic?
But why?
I wanted to take a Moroccan girl into bed.
All that trouble for a common whore, I said. Come and sit
down with us.
No. You come with me.
♦
Where?
We’ll go to the Zoco Chico and have something to drink.
Mahmoud lent me a litde money.
I excused myself to Abdelmalek and his group, and went out
with Kemal.
We went to the brothel run by Seoudiya el Kahala.
I know the woman who runs the place, I explained. And all
the girls.
Hadija Srifiya let us in. She took us into a room and we
sat down. Soon Seoudiya el Kahala came in and greeted me. I
introduced her to Kemal.
Es salaam, he said.
Is he a Moslem? she asked me.
Naturally he is.
Does he speak Arabic?
No. He only knows a few words.
But how can he be a Moslem if he doesn’t speak Arabic?
I told her there were other countries where the people were
Moslems but spoke other languages.
Ana Muslim, Kemal told the two women. Allah ouaMohamed
rasoulillah.
209

M OHAM ED C H O U K R I

We all laughed. Sit down, Lalla Seoudiya told us. Do you
want Hadija to stay here with you?
I asked Kemal. O f course she should stay, he said. Tell her to
bring another pretty one.
We ordered a bottle of cognac and a bottle of soda water. I
told Hadija to find us a girl who liked to drink and talk. The two
women went out.
Do you like that one? I asked Kemal.
She’s perfect. Moroccan girls look a lot like Turkish girls, you
know.
Hadija came back carrying a tray with the drinks. Sfiya el
Qasriya was with her.
She greeted me. How are you, handsome?
I introduced Kemal, and she sat down beside him.
The drinks are a hundred and twenty-five pesetas, said Hadija.
And if we add you two to the bill, how much will it be? I
asked her.
She looked at Sfiya and giggled: Three hundred pesetas.
How much? Kemal asked me.
Three hundred altogether, for them and the drinks.
He pulled out two 100-peseta notes. This is all I’ve got, he
said.
I took the two bills and added another. Call Lalla Seoudiya, I
told Hadija.
Give me the money, she said. Don’t you trust me?
It’s not that. I just want to get everything straight with Lalla
Seoudiya.
210

FOR BREAD ALONE

Ah! I see. Well, do as you like.
Sit down, I said. I’m going to fix it up with her.
I went out of the room in search of Laila Seoudiya. She was
sitting in a far corner of the patio. I want to pay you now for the
drinks and the girls, I told her.
You know how much it is, she said* Two hundred and fifty
pesetas. That’s the price I make especially for you, because you’re
an old client.
I gave her the money, and asked her to have me called at half
past six in the morning. I explained that the four of us would be
using the same room.
W hen I got back to Kemal, he had Sfiya’s head between his
hands, and was stroking her cheeks and kissing her tenderly. Its
as if he was afraid she was going to get away, I said to myself.
Perhaps some day III sleep with a Turkish girl.
Hadija wanted to know if I had got everything arranged with
Laila Seoudiya. I folded a fifty-peseta note very small and slipped
it into her hand, saying: Keep it. Its for you. Everything’s all
settled. She stuffed the money into her bodice and kissed me on
the cheek.
I was just dropping off to sleep when Hadija, lying beside me,
said: Did you hear that? Sfiya says your friend the Turk is licking
her with his tongue.
Let him do what he likes with her, I said.
I’d rather have a tongue lick me than a zib massage me, Sfiya
called out. The two girls laughed.
I want to go to sleep, I told Hadija. I’ve got to get up early and
211

M O HAM ED CH O UK R I

go down to the port.
Don’t worry, she said. Til wake you up as early as you like. I’m
a light sleeper. She turned towards me and hugged me. Then she
pushed my bent knee between her legs and began to rub herself
against it. She wishes it were a zib, I thought.
Sfiya had started to moan, and Hadija increased her efforts
against my knee. Suddenly she pulled at my hair violently. Then
she relaxed. Kemal and Sfiya were laughing together.
Hadija turned over and lay face down. I put out my hand and
ran it lightly over her buttocks. She was still pushing herself slowly
back and forth against the mattress. I became excited again, and
jumped onto her back for a ride. She tried to throw me from my
seat, but I held tight and stayed astride. I pretended to myself
that if I were unseated I should fall into emptiness. I was on a
flying she-camel high over the desert, and to fall off would mean
being lost in the wilderness.
In the morning when I returned from the port I went into a
bookshop in Oued el Ahardan and bought a book that explained
the essentials of writing and reading Arabic.
I found Abdelmalek at the Cafe Moh with his brother Hassan
from Larache. I apologized again for what had happened the
night before. Forget it, he said. I was in a bad mood too.
They asked me to sit down with them, and I showed
Abdelmalek the book I had bought. I’ve got to learn to read and
write, I said. Your brother Hamid showed me a few letters while
we were in the Comisaria together. He said I could learn easily.
Why not?
212

FOR BREAD ALONE

Would you like to go to school in Larache? asked Hassan.
School? Me? I said surprised. Its impossible. I’m twenty years
old and I cant read a word.
That doesn’t matter. I know the head of a school down there.
I’ll give you a note to him. He’ll take you. He has a soft spot
for out-of-towners who want to study. If I didn’t have to go to
Tetuan with this trouble I could take you myself to see him.
He paused, and then said: Why don’t you go and buy an
envelope and a sheet of paper, and I’ll write you the note.
I did not believe in any of this, but I did as he suggested, and
hurried back to the cafe. He laid the sheet of paper on top of a
periodical, and began to write. From time to time he stopped and
smoked a pipe of&/with us. When he had finished he folded the
paper and put it into the envelope. Then he handed it to me.
When should I go to Larache to see him? I asked Hassan.
Whenever you like. But try and go soon.
It was about noon when Hassan said goodbye to us, and went
out to catch the bus to Tetuan. As he shook my hand he said:
Be sure and go to Larache. I’ll look for you down there in a few
days.
W hen he had gone, Abdelmalek said: I’ve got to go up to the
graveyard at Bou Araqia.
W hat for? I asked him.
I promised some of my friends here in the cafe I’d chant some
surat today. One of them is Afiouna. His mother’s buried there.
I’ll go with you, I said. Would you be able to chant a surah at
my brother’s grave?
213

MOHAM ED C H O U K R I

Your brother?
I have a brother buried there.
We smoked two pipes and then went out. On the way I asked
him: W hat happened with Hassan? W hat trouble has he got in
Tetuan?
He’s crazy. They found him drinking wine and smoking in
the students dormitory at the mosque.
Tough luck!
Hes always doing stupid things like that.
As we went through the Zoco de Fuera I bought a bunch of
flowers, and at the gateway to the cemetery a sprig of myrde.
Inside we found a few tolba chanting. The relatives of the dead
stood listening. We wandered among the graves.
Do you know where each grave is? Each one you’re going to
chant for?
No, he said. Its the idea that’s important. I don’t have to be
standing beside a grave to chant to it. Where’s your brother’s
grave?
I looked towards the wall at whose base Abdelqader had been
buried.
It s impossible to find it, I told him. We never made him a
gravestone before we went to Tetuan. There was no money.
My father had just got out of jail, and my mother was selling
vegetables in the Zoco de Fuera.
We climbed to the top of a small hill, and Abdelmalek began
to chant the verses for the relatives of his friends. W hen he had
finished, he asked me: Which part was he buried in?
214

FOR BREAD ALONE

Then we walked down towards the ruined wall. Over this
way, near this wall, I said.
He intoned: Ya sin oual Qoran el Hakim ... while I laid the
flowers on several nearby graves. My brother is buried somewhere
here, I said to myself. Maybe under my feet, or under Abdelmalek s
feet. And the words Abdelmalek is chanting, what are they for?
My litde brother never had a chance to sin. All he did was to live
his illness. The old man who had helped to bury him had told
me: Your brother is with the angels. Has he become an angel,
perhaps? And I, what shall I become? A devil, most likely. They
say the little ones are angels and the big ones are devils, and its
too late for me to be an angel.

215